welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday life
I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor
of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at
Stanford school of medicine today my
guest is Jocko willink Jocko willink is
a retired Navy SEAL and author of
numerous important books on leadership
and Team Dynamics and the host of the
Jocko podcast during his 20-year career
with the U.S Navy Jocko served with Seal
Team 3 as commander of task unit Bruiser
in ramadi Iraq and elsewhere in the
Middle East as well as deployments in
Asia and Europe after retiring from the
Navy Jocko used his experience and
knowledge gleaned from his time in the
SEAL Teams as a way to develop tools
that anybody can use to develop their
leadership skills both for leading
themselves and for leading others that
took the form of several important books
the first of which was published in 2015
and is entitled extreme ownership how
U.S Navy Seals lead and win he has also
authored several books for kids about
leadership personal development and how
to navigate various aspects of of life
I've read both extreme ownership and the
way of the warrior kid and I found them
to be immensely useful in terms of
actionable information and understanding
of oneself and different kinds of
relationships both in and out of the
workplace typically guests on the
huberman Lab podcast are scientists and
or clinicians
it was some time ago that I was a guest
on the Jocko podcast and during the
course of our conversation on his
podcast we quickly realized that many of
the science-based tools that my
laboratory has focused on and that I've
used over the years and shared on the
huberman Lab podcast had Direct overlap
and parallel with many of the tools that
Jocko and other members of the SEAL
Teams had arrived at independently that
is without knowledge of the underlying
science and in fact he had many more
tools that he had Incorporated during
his years in the SEAL Teams as well as
in business leadership in family and
elsewhere in life that I quickly
realized it would be an enormously
valuable conversation to have him on
this podcast in order to share those
tools with the general public during
today's episode we discussed numerous
tools that Jocko has taught and used
over the years in a number of different
contexts including tools for generating
more physical energy and for generating
more focus and cognitive energy and for
navigating sticking points that is how
to deal with lack of motivation how to
deal with difficult relationships in the
workplace and elsewhere and perhaps most
importantly how to think about and
navigate the self in fact we spend quite
a bit of time talking about this notion
of the self and one's self-identity and
how self-identity plays into our ability
to engage in actions of specific types
consistently over time where it can hold
us back how to gain better perspective
and how to help others gain better
perspective so that we can work better
with them and them with us we also go
deep into the likely scientific
mechanisms underlying why the tools that
Jocko teaches and uses are so effective
in fact one thing that you'll
immediately notice is that Jocko was
writing things down and I was writing
things down throughout the conversation
and that just reflects the fact that
he's not just an immensely powerful
teacher he's also a practitioner and an
avid learner he's always seeking
knowledge so we kick back and forth our
ideas about what likely does and does
not underlie different tools and
techniques focusing of course mostly on
what works in the practical sense in the
world what I can assure you is that by
the end of today's episode thanks to
Jocko's immense generosity and curiosity
you will come away with a large number
of tools and much richer understanding
of how to navigate and enhance mental
health physical health and performance
in all aspects of life before we begin
I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford it is however
part of my desire and effort to bring
zero cost to Consumer information about
science and science related tools to the
general public in keeping with that
theme I'd like to thank the sponsors of
today's podcast our first sponsor is
Maui Nui Maui Nui is venison that is by
far the most nutrient dense and
delicious red meat commercially
available Maui knew he spent nearly a
decade building a USDA certified wild
harvesting system to help balance
invasive deer populations on the island
of Maui the solution they built turns
the proliferation of an otherwise
invasive species into a wide range of
nutrient-dense products from fresh
butcher cuts and organ Meats to bone
broth jerky and even pet treats the
quality and nutrient value Maui Nui
Meats is extraordinary for instance
their bone broth has an unmatched 25
grams of protein per 100 calories as
I've talked about with guests and in
Solo episodes of this podcast getting
adequate protein intake and in
particular high quality protein intake
is extremely important current research
suggests that most people should be
getting about one gram per pound of body
weight of quality protein per day and
Maui Nui meats are of the absolute
highest quality in terms of the amino
acid profile and other nutrients
contained in their venison if you would
like to try Maui Nui venison go to
mauinui venison.com huberman to get 20
off your first order again that's Maui
Nui venison.com huberman to get 20 off
today's episode is also brought To Us by
eight sleep eight sleep makes Smart
mattress covers with cooling Heating and
sleep tracking capacity I've discussed
many times before on this podcast about
the key importance of temperature in
regulating the quality of your sleep put
simply in order to fall asleep and stay
deeply asleep throughout the night your
body temperature has to drop by about
one to three degrees and waking up
conversely involves your body
temperature increasing by about one to
three degrees now people vary in their
core body temperature and whether or not
they tend to run hot or cold throughout
the night but with eight sleep
mattresses and mattress covers you can
literally program in the exact
temperature that you want to sleep in
and that allows you to fall deeply
asleep go into slow wave sleep and REM
sleep that is rapid eye movement sleep
in the exact sequence that you need to
in order to have the best quality sleep
and it will even track your sleep for
you I've been sleeping with an eight
Sleep mattress cover on my mattress for
about eight months now and it is
incredible my sleep was already pretty
good and now it is fantastic and I feel
so much more alert and focused my mood
is far better throughout the day I
thought I was optimized and with eight
sleep now I realize I had a lot more
room to improve my sleep and my daytime
wakefulness if you'd like to try eight
sleep you can go to eightsleep.com
huberman and check out their pod Pro
cover and save 150 at checkout Aid sleep
currently ships in the USA Canada UK and
selected countries in the EU and
Australia again that's eightsleep.com
huberman to save 150 at checkout today's
episode is also brought To Us by element
element is an electrolyte drink that has
everything you need and nothing you
don't that means the exact ratios of
electrolytes are an element and those
are sodium magnesium and potassium but
it has no sugar I've talked many times
before on this podcast about the key
role of hydration and electrolytes for
nerve cell function neuron function as
well as the function of all the cells
and all the tissues and organ systems of
the body
if we have sodium magnesium and
potassium present in the proper ratios
all of those cells function properly and
all our bodily systems can be optimized
if the electrolytes are not present and
if hydration is low we simply can't
think as well as we would otherwise our
mood is off hormone systems go off our
ability to get into physical action to
engage in endurance and strength and all
sorts of other things is diminished so
with element you can make sure that
you're staying on top of your hydration
and that you're getting the proper
ratios of electrolytes if you'd like to
try element you can go to drink element
that's lmnt.com huberman and you'll get
a free element sample pack with your
purchase and right now element has two
special flavors for the holidays
chocolate caramel and mint chocolate by
the way both of those taste extremely
good cold and even better I find heated
up believe it or not you can have them
as kind of a tea they're delicious and
all of their flavors are delicious for
the ones that you drink typically cold I
like the raspberry flavor the watermelon
flavor and frankly I like the Citrus
flavor as well they're all delicious so
again if you want to try element you can
go to element.com huberman the huberman
Lab podcast is now partnered with
momentous supplements to find the
supplements we discuss on the huberman
Lab podcast you can go to live momentous
spelled ous live momentous.com huberman
I should just mention that the library
of those supplements is constantly
expanding again that's livmentis.com
huberman and now for my discussion with
Jocko willink Jocko willink welcome
thanks for having me man I'm super
excited and super happy to have you here
I'm glad to be here I know that you and
I did
five and a half hours on my podcast so
uh schedule is clear let's go let's go
and actually and people will see the
Jocko go drinks uh this is not some sort
of promotional by me but these are the
the energy drinks I drink so this could
be uh called the bring your own go
podcast
um it is the energy drink I drink and no
I'm not told to promote that or paid to
promote that's just the one that I drink
so there you go
um no pun intended
uh I was just saying to our producer a
moment ago that
rarely do I sit down and do a podcast
with somebody that's skilled in
podcasting
Lex Friedman would be the only person
that I've had on this podcast I believe
who's also a podcaster since you're a
podcaster and many other things I
confess I'm a little bit intimidated
well it's a weird thing to actually call
a skill because it's something that I
just kind of started doing it's
something that you just kind of started
doing it's something that Lex just kind
of started doing and I I never practiced
it I didn't sit down before my first
podcast and think about how I should
deliver things I just kind of did it so
I I maybe it's just luck more than skill
well you and I actually go back further
than that conversation that we had on
your podcast I think it might have been
2014 2015 and you were on the Tim
Ferriss podcast
and the time I was living with my
girlfriend we had moved from San Diego
to the Bay Area we're living in this
little tiny apartment in a basement in
Oakland trying to save up to buy a place
or rent a place that was decent to live
in
and we both knew a lot of Team guys she
knew more Team guys than I did in San
Diego had dated a few just to be direct
um great woman those guys were cool to
me mostly and um I remember when I saw
the photo on the top card for Tim's
podcast it was it was your face I said
do you know this guy from San Diego and
she goes nope but if you had to draw a
Navy SEAL that's what you draw so I
think for a lot of people
you embody their notion of a number of
different things some of which you talk
about but some of which when you open up
a bit and really get specific about work
in the military and work in daily life
and what it is to be you but really what
it is to be a human being
some important contradictions also
emerge right
obviously discipline is a theme that
people associate with you right in my
view and I think in the view of a lot of
people you embody discipline so today I
definitely want to talk about
routines but also mindsets but also
things that you do and ways that you
approach things that might
um not contradict but not be so obvious
to people might be a little bit
counter-intuitive and in addition to
that you have a lot of different aspects
to your life in addition to running
businesses you're a family man you have
children and married a long time and so
you have a lot of Knowledge from
different domains of life so with your
permission I'd like to dive into all of
them over the next 26 hours Let's dive
great
I'm fascinated by this idea of sense of
self
I feel like all of us can look back to a
time early in life when we first had
some experience could be in the art
class could be fishing could be sport
doesn't really matter
what the exact experience was but where
we first realized that there are really
cool things in the world like something
turned us on at the level of excitement
or maybe scared us or something like
that do you have any recollection of
such an event maybe not the first one
but do you ever remember hearing or
seeing something as a young kid and
maybe you could tell us how young and
just thinking like yeah more of that
please
I A lot of times when people ask
questions along the this line of like
when was there a moment right when was
there a moment that you realized
discipline or when was there a moment
you realized leadership or when was
there a moment you realized detachment
kind of like the question here when was
there a moment you realized
for lack of a better way of saying it
I'm a person right I'm a I'm a person
with my own thoughts and I can make
things happen and for me all those
answers are usually fairly gradual you
know there's like a little thing that
indicates you get a clue and then you
move a little bit further down that road
then you get another clue and you move a
little bit further down that road and
you get another clue
uh
so that's what I would say for me life
was like you know when you're when I was
a little kid I
was kind of slowly discovering that I
was a person I was a human
I remember uh my mom
took me shopping I was probably about 10
years old and I needed to get pants for
school and my mom took me shopping
and when I went to into the store there
was a girl that was
I don't know what they're called in a
store a retail sales girl she was
probably about 16.
and I started chatting her up right and
and I kind of recognized it a little bit
but I sort of didn't too and I just was
chatting to this girl and I was making
her laugh I was having a good time with
the whole thing and you know putting on
the pants and spinning around like and
she was laughing
and I remember when we left the store
with the pants and my mom was sort of
talking to me about the fact that what
were you trying to do to that girl and I
was I was thinking to myself
well I kind of liked that girl she was
pretty and I don't know why that popped
into my head but I just remembered
thinking hey man there's a whole world
out there and uh let's go make it happen
yeah it's a great story because it I
think it really speaks to this um thing
that you mentioned which is that
when we first start to realize we have a
sense of self it has something to do
with cause and effect on the world like
we can have an impact in some way on on
things outside of us outside of our home
you know I've lately I've been reading a
lot of psychology and I've been
listening to some of your content and I
definitely want to talk to you about
a study that you covered related to
these um it's a brutal experiment with
these kids that either had stutter or
didn't have stutter I want to get into
that a little bit later but you know
what we do and how we treat people and
how we receive feedback and give
feedback has a big impact but I I think
some of that happens just in our own
relationship to things in the world the
the old Hungarian psychologists I'm
learning how this idea of two kinds of
people they literally thought there were
two kinds of people there are generators
and projectors and generators are people
that are just from a very young age
they realize they can impact other
people positively negatively and they
they want to create things in the world
they want to generate stuff and they go
wow I can actually like build stuff and
break stuff and blow stuff up maybe but
also you know help things and and then
there are these projectors that like to
just kind of reflect on what they see
and they made the really important point
I think that it's not that generators
are good and projectors are bad the
world needs both that they really work
in a kind of symbiotic way but your
story captures the essence of what it is
to be a generator which is that by doing
certain things you can have an impact
and it feeds back to you and it's likely
that they receive something from it as
well yeah and where this all came to
fruition as I as I now piece together as
you're talking through this stuff look
when I joined the military
you join the military and you get a
blank slate so no one cares where you
came from no one cares what you did you
were the captain of this football team
captain the soccer team no one cares no
one cares what your grades were no one
cares what you got on the SATs or the no
one cares about anything you're a blank
slate and then with that blank slate it
is hey if you do this thing if you
perform this task and you perform it
well you will get recognition you will
get
you will hopefully get more control over
your own destiny which is the ultimate
in compensation for for human beings to
have more control over your own destiny
is the ultimate compensation you know
you and I were talking before we hit
record like you can have all the money
in the world but if you don't control
what you're doing every day or at least
you don't control most of what you're
doing then it's not worth it the reason
people try and make money is so they can
have more autonomy in their life
and so in the military it becomes very
clear and it became very clear to me
very quickly that if I performed well I
actually got a lot more freedom with
what I did even in boot camp you know if
you pass an inspection in boot camp you
don't have to redo your locker or you
don't have to make your bet again
because you did it right the first time
and so you have an extra 15 minutes and
and so for me really that's when I
started to realize oh what I'm doing
right now
is going to impact not only what's going
to happen to me in the next hour but in
the next two years three years five
years and I think that's the biggest
miss that we have when we're growing up
and and I know you had your challenges
and tribulations as you were growing up
because you didn't realize oh what I'm
doing right now is going to affect where
I'm going to be in the future and it
didn't happen until you were out of high
school when you went to Junior College
and you're like oh wait a second I can
actually put my life together in a
positive way when you're 14
you're thinking hey what I'm going to do
tomorrow that's basically future
operations
I was like where's where am I going to
get the Slurpee which curves am I going
to hit skateboarding and where we can
play video games tonight or what girls
are we going to hang out with that was
kind of the mindset yeah and then at
some point you you learned and so did I
oh the way the the actions that I take
now are either going to positively
impact my future they're going to
negatively impact my future and the the
more I focused on doing things that are
going to positively impact my future the
better my life became and I think that's
a very huge lesson to learn that I know
I didn't figure out for quite some time
yeah the idea of Investments and
withdrawals
or understanding that early in life in
terms of health behaviors and
intellectual behaviors and and your
point about the military is a really
interesting one I never thought about
the military that way that there's this
Blank Slate when you get in there uh and
before we started we were talking a
little bit about the kinds of mindsets
and people that the military attracts
and um I'd love for you to elaborate on
that again you mentioned um something
interesting this this notion of Garrison
have a interesting word in its own right
um what kind of people do you think the
military attracts and then within the
military do you start to see some kind
of predictable bifurcations where
certain people go down one track and
other people go down another I have a
few friends from the SEAL Teams as we
both know and I've heard sometimes about
the distinction between officers and
enlisted guys this kind of thing but
maybe this the question I'm asking is
more across the board for all of
military and for uh really for people
listening whether or not they are
interested in military or not for their
own for their own life I think there's
an interesting lesson this idea of who
who is attracted to the military is it
like people who want to instill order on
themselves or is it people want to
instill water on other people or both
yeah there's a there's a a really good
book and I did I ended up doing about
four podcasts on this book which is
called the psychology of military
incompetence when I first saw that
amazing title I know when I first saw
that title I thought to myself oh you
know this is some some academic that's
going to look at the military and Bash
it and but I did a little research and
it turned out that the guy that had
written the book and I can't think of
his name right now he was a guy that had
served in World War II was wounded I
mean this guy had this guy understood
what he was talking about
and it's really an obvious concept once
you think about it and his base the
basic premise is this
the military when you look at it from
the outside
it's this orderly place it's a place
where everything has a place it's a
place where if you have a certain rank
on your shoulder you will command
respect and people have to listen to you
that's what it looks like
so it's an attractive place for people
that have an authoritarian mindset for
people that want to just hey don't don't
don't question what I'm saying just shut
up and do what I tell you to do there's
people that love that there's people
that want to live like that you've
worked for them I've worked for them
we've we've experienced those type of
people throughout our lives
that authoritarian mindset that just
want to bark orders and have people
listen to them and so when they when
those people are 14 years old or 16
years old or 18 years old they look at
the military and they see a uniform and
they say people saluting and they see
orders being carried out and they think
that's where I'm gonna go and I can get
the respect that I deserve
and the military certainly attracts
people like that
and those people
that have that
highly disciplined and orderly mindset
can do well inside the military
especially in Garrison and I had to
again we were talking about this earlier
the word garrison I don't think there's
a civilian equivalent to this word but
it basically means the non-combat
situation so when you're out on the
parade field when you're when you're
going through schooling where there's no
combat involved when you're marching
like those kind of things we call that
Garrison it's in the rear it's not in
combat and the people with an
authoritarian mindset actually do pretty
well in Garrison situations why because
things are orderly and you can predict
what's going to happen and you do get a
certain issue of gear and that gear is
going to be delivered on time and you're
going to shoot this number of rounds
down at the range and everything is
going to go according to plan that's
what Garrison is
and so those people join the military
they're attracted to that and they end
up doing well
in peace time
now unfortunately for them
combat is a lot different nothing goes
the way it's supposed to go the bullets
don't get delivered on time the enemy
has a vote on the way things are going
to unfold and you end up in combat in
being in very chaotic situations so the
type of person that thrives in combat
has a more open mind has a more flexible
mind is paying more attention to the
input that they're receiving as opposed
to someone with authoritarian mindset
they don't listen to anybody else they
make up their own mind they bark orders
with someone that has a more open
mindset they're listening they're
they're taking input they're evolving
their plan and those type of people
excel in a combat situation now
unfortunately and this is sort of The
Stereotype too you take that that
dog of war and you put him back into a
Garrison environment he doesn't do well
right he's not showing up on time for
the inspection he doesn't have his he
doesn't get didn't get his hair cut he
doesn't have his weapon clean the way
it's supposed to be cleaned because he's
got his weapon ready for combat not
ready for inspection and and so you get
this there there are these two different
types of people and of course with those
two different types of people there's
degrees going One Direction Another but
what you hope for
is someone that can play the game on the
Garrison side
And yet when it comes time to go into
combat they can also open their mind be
flexible be creative and that's what you
really want is you want someone that is
very good at solving problems and to do
that you need to have a creative open
mind to figure out how we're going to
deal with something so I think that's a
stereotype The Stereotype is that
everyone in the military is sort of
robotic and
falling into the hierarchy and we bark
orders and people follow orders and
that's just not true
there is an element of truth to it but
is not the whole truth and certainly if
you look at history the people that are
that excel in combat are the people that
maybe have a little bit of a rebellious
streak people that have that are just
more creative and more open-minded
some of my friends from the SEAL Teams
um will sometimes throw out stereotypes
about the different divisions in the
military is there any truth to this idea
that you know Air Force types are one
way and Marines are one way and Navy's
one-way armies a certain way like sort
of a a general Contour of Personality or
is that just kind of inside ball joking
around it's a little bit of both I mean
certainly the Marine Corps is steeped in
Tradition and you you if you if you make
a guess at what a marine when you meet
or if you had to had to guess what a
Marine's going to be like you you're
probably gonna be pretty close I mean
Marines have a incredible program to
indoctrinate their people into the
culture of the Marine Corps and the
Marine Corps has an incredibly strong
culture it's a powerful culture I love
the Marine Corps I've worked with the
Marine Corps a ton and they're
outstanding as a generality certainly
you could make those assumptions about
the Marines in general now does that
mean that every Marine is the same no
absolutely not same thing with the Army
same thing with the Air Force course
same thing with the Navy you've got
these kind of stereotypes that exist for
a reason you know it's interesting too
it's one of my friends named Ben
Milligan wrote a wrote an incredible
book called by water beneath the walls
which I've given him a huge hassle about
because it's the worst title of all time
but it's it's certainly the best book
written about
the seal team's history and where the
SEAL Teams came from
and and it's interesting it's something
that I had heard from a seal officer
that had given a speech years ago it has
changed in command and what he said was
Hey listen he was trying to emphasize
why the seal teams were good and one of
the things he said was you know in in
the Army and he was talking historically
he goes hey in the Army if you start to
lose a battle you can just Retreat and
run away
in the Navy traditionally we're fighting
on board a ship
and if that ship if we can't run away
we're fighting if we lose we die so
seals can't quit this is sort of this uh
you know a little over the top
expression but when you take that a
little bit further
when you look at the history of the Navy
if you're you know if we were in the
Navy 150 years ago
you would have to go on deployment you
would take your ship and you would sail
somewhere and you wouldn't be able to
talk to me anymore
so you would have to understand what it
is you were trying to accomplish and
then just go out there and make it
happen that's decentralized command and
that's something that exists in the seal
teams without question very
decentralized command and that's one of
the one of the absolute strengths of the
SEAL Teams is you've got leaders at
every level inside the organization that
if they don't know exactly if they're
not told what to do they're going to go
okay I don't haven't been told what to
do but I'm gonna go figure it out and
that's one of the strengths of the SEAL
Teams we don't we also we have more
doctor now but when I came in the SEAL
Teams
there was no Doctrine it was all word of
mouth and so the the Army in the Marine
Corps if you have to conduct an ambush
you can pull out a manual and you can
look up how to conduct an ambush platoon
Ambush how to conduct it and it's all
written very clear and they're great
documents that's the fm7 tac8 Infantry
platoon and Squad I think is the is the
Army Doctrine I can see the little
neurons in your hippocampus firing and
see if it's embedded in there forever
and it's a great manual
and you can pull that thing out and you
have a place to start from in the SEAL
Teams we didn't have that at all so you
would hear from your platoon Chief this
is how you conduct an ambush and he had
heard it from his platoon Chief who
heard it from his platoon Chief who
heard it from his platoon Chief and that
the Two Chief was in Vietnam so it's
getting passed down but you can make
adjustments to it and you you can
you can alter the plan a little bit
because hey the terrain is different or
hey the the the night vision we now have
so there's changes that we can make
because there's no Doctrine
so not having any Doctrine in many ways
is a strength also it can be a weakness
because if you've got a new platoon
Commander that's never done a uh an
ambush before and he has no idea what
he's doing this platoon Chief has been
out of the loop for a long time and he
doesn't know what he's doing there's no
way there's no reference
so there's strengths and weaknesses just
like any characteristic right
everybody's characteristic that you've
got strength and you've got weaknesses
and your weaknesses can be strength and
your strength can be weaknesses
to get back to your original question
are there stereotypes inside of each of
the military branches sure but are there
outliers in each of the military
branches there are absolutely and that's
why you can't judge a book by its cover
for people listening to this who are not
in the military maybe have some military
lineage in their family or not but who
want to understand a little bit better
about how structure and lack of
structure can both support being
effective in in life in relationships in
daily life in Fitness in business in
school I think those are the big domains
in Creative endeavors
I think it'd be useful for them to
understand a little bit about how you in
particular balance discipline and
structure with dare I say lack of
discipline and structure you could
actually just say the word Freedom right
because because that's what it turns
into or maybe even play I you know I
bring this up in part because I've seen
some posts that you put up of you you
know playing the guitar with friends or
music one of them was a tribute to
someone who I either was killed in
combat or passed away so you know what
these moments of connection between
people sometimes are working together
but sometimes are in relaxation and play
and these kinds of things and I think it
was a really important post for people
to see that wow Jocko willing kicks back
with a guitar not trying to take over
stages maybe you are maybe you have a
plan anyone could do it you'd probably
be the one but
what is the balance for you in terms of
structure and lack of structure and I'm
not going to ask for your daily routine
we know that you get up early you train
but I do have some specific questions
that I think would be helpful in putting
some meat on the the kind of uh the
Notions about you and again this isn't
to pick into your life but more to to
grab well it's to pick into your life
the uh so a question I asked you in the
law because it's one that you know
having seen your content for a long time
and really benefited from it I was
curious you get up early at about 4 30
you train every morning
how long do you train for and is there
any Global structure to that and of
course everyone needs different programs
but do you is it like weight training
one day cardio training the next day are
you combining them is it always an hour
is it always half an hour I think people
would benefit from getting a little bit
more understanding of what that looks
like for you with the caveat that
everyone has different needs levels of
you know background Etc but I'm
intensely curious about this and I'm
certain I'm not the only one so do you
want to talk about weight lifting or
rock and roll on the guitar uh I want to
talk about
um let's your let's talk about the most
structured first part of your day and
then let's talk about the least
structured part of your day at least the
part that you can share with the with
the world
yeah uh waking up early and I'm gonna
work out and depending on what's going
on that day if I have an early flight I
might work out for
eight minutes right I might go in and do
2 000 meters on the rower get get a
sweat going hard as I can and then I'm
done and because I gotta go catch a
flight so that could be happening maybe
I'm supposed to go surfing in the
morning I wake up the waves are terrible
and so now I've got nothing to do I've
planned out you know to be surfing for
two or three hours
and now I'm not gonna go surfing so I'm
gonna go I'm gonna go lift and I'm gonna
go play in the gym and do a bunch of
stuff I'm gonna spend two or three hours
in there
I love doing that
so the workout could be anywhere between
what I just say eight minutes and three
hours and it could be anything in
between I I fully enjoy the the physical
aspect of working out so if I have more
time to spend in the gym I'll spend it
I remember my dad saying at one point if
I retired I wouldn't know what to do
and I I was thinking myself are you
serious right now you know if I didn't
have anything to do I'd spend six hours
a day in the gym I'd spend four hours
doing Jiu Jitsu like I could fill my day
I could fill every day with just
physical activity things that I just
like doing uh but that's so wake up
early get a sweat going and do I lift
yes do i do cardio yes do I run yes do i
Sprint yes do I lift heavy weights yes
do I swing kettlebells yes I I do
everything and and anything and I enjoy
all of it and I'm not really good at any
of it you know I'm not I'm not really
good at any one aspect of physical
activity I I'm there's people that are
infinitely better at me in every aspect
of and I'm not just talking about oh
this guy's a world-class level and
there's like a guy named Fred down at
the gym that can deadlift more than me
there was a guy when I was at Seal Team
too there was a guy who was
probably five seven and he looked kind
of chubby and he was older than me and
he could run faster than me and he could
bench more than me those guys are out
there it was just so bothersome yeah
they're out there they they've got some
engine in there related to something I
mean I do think there are genetic
differences in terms of people's
resilience and work out but even just
grip strength is highly um highly
subject to like genetic influences
maximum grip strength but of course
there's a huge range in what people can
develop but I guarantee your grip
strength is is greater than mine
um people ask me this all the time who
would win an arm wrestling between you
and Jago my Jocko
you know there's a lot of technique in
arm wrestling uh I have to imagine
they're putting their body behind it
they're putting their back like there is
legitimate technique in arm wrestling
where for me yet yeah there's no like if
we could bring a female arm wrestler in
here that knows how to arm wrestle
because I don't know how to arm wrestle
either and she would be both of us
um because there's a lot of there's a
lot more technique and arm wrestling
than you know
then most people recognize there's all
these little games that are going on
there's all this little arm position
that you get so just like everything
else it's technique there's a lot of
technique in arm wrestling that's good
to know I didn't know that about arm
wrestling I think we all start off with
some genetic predispositions both good
and bad for different things and then
there's as far as we know there's a huge
range based through neuroplasticity and
muscle adaptation Etc in what we can
obtain so I never want genetic
predisposition to serve as a barrier no
one knows also what the upper limits of
any of these things are and some of the
best examples we know from Sport and
certainly from Academia are people who
knew they were at a disadvantage and
just worked 10 times harder than
everybody else because they had an ax to
grind with their genetic disadvantage
which is really cool at the face of it
I'd like to take a quick break and
acknowledge one of our sponsors athletic
greens athletic greens now called ag1 is
a vitamin mineral probiotic drink that
covers all of your foundational
nutritional needs I've been taking
athletic greens since 2012 so I'm
delighted that they're sponsoring the
podcast the reason I started taking
athletic greens and the reason I still
take athletic greens once are usually
twice a day is that it gets to be the
probiotics that I need for gut health
our gut is very important it's populated
by gut microbiota that communicate with
the brain the immune system and
basically all the biological systems of
our body to strongly impact our
immediate and long-term health
and those probiotics and athletic greens
are optimal and vital for microbiotic
health in addition athletic greens
contains a number of adaptogens vitamins
and minerals that make sure that all of
my foundational nutritional needs are
met and it tastes great if you'd like to
try athletic greens you can go to
athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll
give you five free travel packs that
make it really easy to mix up athletic
greens while you're on the road in the
car on the plane Etc and they'll give
you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2
again that's athleticgreens.com huberman
to get the five free travel packs and
the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 so you
get you get the training and do track
your training in in a detailed way are
you keeping track of lifts and so I
write down what I do and I'll write down
I write down what I do every day and
that way I can go back and say you know
what was I doing back then because I
might go through some phase where I'm
trying to do more pull-ups or I'm trying
to deadlift more and I'm trying or
whatever the whatever the thing is I'll
go back into because I have a board of
dead lifting after a while and let's
face it if you just want to be a good
dead lifter
you're not going to be that fast right
you're you're going to be slow on long
runs so you don't want to go too deep
into deadlifting and you also don't want
to be so good at long runs that you
can't deadlift you know a good amount of
weight so I got to go through phases and
I'll get into something for a while and
I'll get into something else so I do log
down what I'm doing so I can look back
and say oh dang you know I I'm not even
close to as strong as I used to be need
to get back to that
I'm fascinated by the concept of energy
I think it's one of the most interesting
aspects in all of biology all of
psychology and all of life and what when
I say energy I mean
um the distinction between being back on
your heels flat-footed or forward Center
of mass you know and I get the
impression and I think everyone gets the
impression you're somebody with a lot of
energy and I wonder whether or not you
wake up with a lot of energy and you
feel like you have to burn it off with
this physical activity and and work and
other demands in your life where do you
find that you wake up and your energy is
kind of neutral and exercise and
physical activity gives you energy
because I think this is one of the key
things out there I think that acts as a
barrier for people doing more with their
body because they maybe they don't want
to Tire themselves out or maybe they
don't feel like they have enough energy
to begin with
it's also feeds into this idea that you
know some people just have a lot of
energy they're really physical and other
people aren't so on let's just say on
most days do you wake up feeling like
you want to burn off energy build energy
what does exercise mean to you and then
maybe we can talk about some of the
underlying stuff going on there because
I think we both might find it
interesting I would say it's both right
there's no way I could sit here and say
oh yeah every day that alarm clock goes
off and I'm like oh yeah let's rock and
roll no certainly that's not the case
it's also certainly not the case that
every day I'm like oh God not again no
uh I'd say most the time the alarm clock
goes off and I I don't think a bunch
like when my alarm clock goes off I
don't I don't think a bunch I don't
debate with myself I'm not negotiating I
I just the thing goes off and I'm doing
what I'm supposed to do
sort of robotic now I this this much I
can say when you go and work out you're
going to feel better you will get energy
from working out you that is that is a
guarantee if you go work out you're
going to feel better if you go break a
sweat you're going to feel better this
you're going to get more energy from it
and look you gotta go really really hard
to where now you feel more tired when
you're done and even that I mean you got
to go psycho I'll do that occasionally
but I don't do that on a daily basis you
know at the end of the day if I wake up
lift run Surf and then I do Jiu Jitsu in
the afternoon like at the end of that
day I'm tired
and I feel tired uh but normal day
working out just makes you feel better
it definitely gives you it definitely
gives me energy I should say because I
guess I'm not everybody yeah it's I
think it's a very important point
because one of the things that we are
learning from circadian biology you know
time of day effects and sunlight and all
that stuff that we talk about on our
podcast that you've done intuitively
right this is what we can drive to it
was kind of crazy last time we had a
conversation is that so many of the
things that science is telling us to do
and that we emphasize on the podcast
this podcast you've been doing or are
built into military schedules and one of
them is this notion of waking up early
and getting physical early in the day
and I suppose if we were to just throw
one blanket rule on the table
to Encompass the broadest number of
themes it's that once every 24 hours
we each and all get a big increase in
this release of the hormone cortisol
which everyone says oh cortisol it's
terrible you know he's going to burn you
out adrenal burnout all that stuff
but it's a non-negotiable peak
and you want it to arrive early in the
day and viewing sunlight physical
activity caffeine and in particular
intense exercise
all amplify that cortisol peak in fact I
think it's the numbers I'm seeing is
just sunlight viewing gives you a 50
increase in that course I'll exercise on
top of that another 50 to 75 increase so
this huge release in this hormone that
everyone thinks is terrible but actually
sets this huge wave in motion for the
rest of the day
which gives you more energy higher
levels of immune function more Focus Etc
and does indeed as you mentioned in your
example of your daily life sets a timer
so that about 14 to 16 hours later
you're sleepy which is what you want 14
to 68 hours later unless of course
you're running vampire shifts in the
military or you're on shift work but
most people aren't of course so I think
the idea that movement and exercise
gives us energy I think is an important
idea and it's something that I was
frankly I was hoping your answer would
be that as opposed to that you know you
wake up every day and you just want to
just attack the world because you have
so much energy getting out of bed
because frankly I never feel that way
but I always feel better after I train
always and of course there are times
when I crash in the early afternoon if I
train really really hard but usually
that's when I over caffeinate to an
outrageous degree and then I don't
nourish after or I over nourish so this
is the other thing that eating the whole
rest and digesting the digest word in
there is meant to for it's there for a
reason which is that when we eat a
really big meal we actually need to slow
down so I hate to get into daily
schedules at the level of nitpicking and
nutrition is about the most
controversial topic on the internet
um but do you nourish after you train
and if you do do you do it to the point
where you're kind of like okay I'm
mostly full or I'm full are you trying
to like really nourish yourself or do
you find that eating slows you down I
find that eating slows me down and I
would say again this it's weird how some
of this stuff is like the main reason I
got in the habit of waking up early and
working out is because if you do it
before anyone else is awake then they
can't bother you and you can get stuff
done right you go to the Seal team and
you get there before anyone else is
there no one can say hey can you help us
with this hey no one sent you an email
so you get you get that time you get it
done and and it's yours right I remember
when you were on my podcast and I don't
wear sunglasses when I run in the
morning because I sweat and it fills my
sunglasses it's not because I wanna let
let the UV light into my eyes that's not
cortisol right it's not for the cortisol
I didn't know that it's cool that I know
it now but I just did it because I don't
like to sweat in my sunglasses can't see
so I just run without him and put a hat
on uh as far as eating I don't like to
do Physically Active things with food in
my stomach
that's just the way it is yeah I mean
and so I don't wanna and what really
keeps that in line for me is I'm doing
Jiu Jitsu in the afternoon and so if I'm
eating a big lunch by the time the
afternoon rolls around I'm kind of uh I
got food in my gut and I just don't like
that feeling so no I don't eat a big
meal until I'm kind of done with the
physical stuff for the day which is
usually at night six seven o'clock at
night which I guess there's some bad
things about that I eat too late well
the data say you know if you're yeah
this we could go down a rabbit hole with
this and then someone's gonna pull up
some little clinical study and then
another one that counters that I mean I
think the data essentially say that
having a regular meal schedule that
allows you to sleep well at night
whatever that means for you and that
allows you to be active and focused when
you need to be active and focused that's
the ideal schedule I
when I'm working with clients like so I
have a leadership consulting company
Echelon front when I'm going to work
with a client I'm not eating because
because they're going to be asking me
questions we're going to be diving into
what's happening inside their business
like there's a lot of stuff going on
it's a lot of cognitive work so I'm not
eating before podcast I'm not eating
before a podcast before I'm recording
podcast I'm not eating because I don't
want to have a bunch of food in my
stomach I want to you you get a certain
level of mental Clarity when you haven't
eaten a bunch of food so going out on
missions I never would eat before I go
out on a mission I would eat when I come
home you know you get home four o'clock
in the morning three o'clock in the
morning from doing operation cool then
I'll eat because then I'm gonna I'm
gonna do a debrief for 15 minutes clean
weapons and then eat a big meal go to
sleep cool yeah I don't want to have
food in my stomach when I've got to
perform or execute anything so again I
think that's just kind of a fluke that I
ended up living like that but that's
kind of how I live it's a fortunate
fluke for all of us because because so
much of what you embody and what you do
I think centers around this idea of
discipline of course but also energy
it's it's
um it's the intuitive sense I get about
why people are so drawn to your
messaging and what you do and how you do
it
energy we know of course is caloric
energy I think that's what most people
default to they go oh that how many you
know calories or energy and how many
calories in that and you need calories
to fuel things but the energy that
you're describing I think is the one
that well it really maps to Eastern
Traditions more directly the whole yin
and yang thing Yin and Yen I always get
that wrong so which is the notion of
neural energy and so there's a
particular cluster of chemicals in US it
has a fancy name called the
catecholamines but that's dopamine
epinephrine which is adrenaline and
norepinephrine and then you've got
cortisol and those four hang out
together and basically give us enough
energy to run our brain and body
for 50 days
50 days so the idea that you have to eat
before you train sure for some people
that might work better than others but I
think what people don't realize is that
anytime we're taking in caloric energy
it takes neural energy in order to
digest that and put it into storage and
so the way you describe your day of yeah
I also don't eat before I train I like
to hydrate and caffeinate I have been
drinking these before I drink I have to
limit myself to two before because
otherwise I'm like picking up I'm
already quaking a little bit but
um the second one but I have a pretty
high caffeine tolerance so I like to
train fasted also and then I find it
gives me energy but then the moment that
I eat a meal that's a little too large
all of a sudden I'm I'm out of energy
and what's the deal this calories are
energy right you're supposed to have
energy in order to think and move and I
think I think a lot of the world has
this backwards and this isn't a push for
intermittent fasting or any particular
style of eating really I don't care if
people are carnivore review it doesn't
matter to me whatever works I happen to
be an omnivore but I think once people
understand the energy to do things is
neural
and yet of course it relies on having
glycogen and all this stuff around but
neural energy is what it's really about
then your schedule and the way you
function and the way you describe your
schedule really makes a ton of sense so
you described getting up and lifting
running surfing and Jiu Jitsu in the
same day so on a day like that you're
hydrating correct oh yeah definitely
because that's vital and I know in the
teams in the SEAL Teams there's a lot of
discussion about hydration is important
even though you guys I know are supposed
to be able to like eat sand and survive
on sunlight and dirt and like drink your
own blood you know it's hydration's
taken seriously right yeah and and
different people need different amount
of hydration and I unfortunately was one
I always needed to bring a lot of water
in the field which sucked because water
is heavy and I have friends one of my
friends Tony BTF Tony he go in the field
with like a can of Copenhagen and coffee
in his canteen and go like three
straight days he's a Desert Rat man he
could just survive and I would always
have to bring us on water and I sweat a
ton when I work out or when I'm doing
anything that requires physical physical
output I'm going to I sweat a ton so I
have to drink a lot of water for sure
but not everyone's the same you know
yeah I think if most people focused more
on hydration and movement
they would find they have
two I'm gonna Venture a guess here this
is not a scientific study but two to
four times more energy than if they
focused on caloric energy and what to
eat yeah and I think the cool thing
about this you know you're using the
term energy and what's cool about this
is
you or I I create energy right I create
energy by like I said by going to the by
going and lifting in the morning by
going and doing burp you go do burpees
you go do 100 burpees like you're
creating energy you're gonna be tired
you're gonna be sweating but you just
created energy so that stuff is is
totally true I'm glad there's
Neuroscience to back it up yeah I'm
actually thinking about devoting some of
my lab to this you know one of the best
examples another uh familiar territory
for you is cold water you know nowadays
there's a lot about ice baths and cold
baths and showers and all that and I
always like to just say it listen it's
all just a reliable source of inducing
adrenaline release and you get out of a
cold shower you have more energy and
that energy couldn't have been caloric
energy it's adrenaline and I you know
again I'm it's fair to say I'm obsessed
by the ideas of identity which is a
little bit how we started off and I want
to get back to it and energy I feel like
identity and energy can account for
75 of what it is to you know live a good
life if you can Master those because
then it all seems to fall into bins it's
like of course you need sleep why well
to restore your neural energy right at
some point you just fade out of neural
energy if you don't sleep so sleep then
falls into a particular bin with a
particular purpose and then exercise
becomes not a way to like burn energy
but as you said to create energy we
actually are starting to understand why
this is
if you'll indulge me for a second on
some Neuroscience I we didn't talk about
this last time we have neural circuits
that control deliberate action we have
neural circuits that control deliberate
actions that we forget that we're doing
like walking and then we have neural
circuits which are called Central
pattern generators and these are the
neural circuits that love to just work
on their own and in the background just
kind of hum in the background and take
care of all the stuff like heartbeat
breathing and movement that is
repetitive like if you if you're just
marching and you don't have to adjust
your Cadence much or maybe you're hiking
even and stepping this Rock that Rock
once those Central pattern generators
get going it's very automatic and we
know that one so Central pattern
generators get going there's the release
of those catecholamines those three or
four molecules that then feed all the
other neural systems they're called
neuromodulators for a reason because
they set the gain higher so then you go
out for a run or a jog or a hike or
something and where you pedal or you row
and then your whole system is is at a
higher RPM So when you say create energy
neuroscientists are starting to
understand what that is repetitive
movement that allows you to forget the
motor commands that are required to
generate that movement you might think
about your row stroke or something like
that but you can do it without thinking
much you come off of that and you now
are set at a higher RPM to do more
deliberate stuff and none of this again
involved like eating enough
carbohydrates or making sure you had
enough ketones or enough protein like
it's like you got plenty of that stuff
providing you nourish at some point
every 24 hours or so so we we I think we
know a little bit about the science
behind Jocko willink's schedule now
um but I will ask this are there certain
forms of exercise like weight lifting
versus cardio that you find give you
an especially Big Boost in what we're
calling energy and here this could be
cognitive energy it could be physical
energy but a Readiness for the next
thing yeah first I got to back you up on
this I'm backing up your your your
science so have you ever do you ever
Rock marched like put on a heavy weight
and yeah sorry to interrupt yeah Peter
attia got me into this he got me into
doing a long Sunday instead of a long
Sunday Run throwing on a lightweight
vest or a Ruck and going out for like
three hours and the first 20 minutes I
find I always want to go faster and get
it over with but then I've learned that
the real pain in it sets in around an
hour and then the beauty sets in around
90 minutes you're like I could do this
all day all night and I never want to
stop see that's when you were describing
how this chemical these chemicals get
released and once you're in that
automatic mode because in the single
teams you're doing maritime operations
for a month and then you're going to do
some kill house shooting and so you're
not carrying a bunch of weight and then
you go out to the desert and now you're
putting on 80 pounds and you're going on
a like day one and you get out there
you're going on an 80 pound Rock March
and the first freaking 17 minutes the
first 23 minutes
suck they just suck and what was
beautiful was by the time I was you know
23 24 years old about oh yeah this is
gonna suck for 17 minutes and then it's
gonna be I'm gonna be a robot and it
doesn't matter anymore I can just keep
going forever so it sounds like what
you're saying is what I experienced my
basically my whole adult life there's
going to be a little break-in period
mentally where you think this totally
sucks
and then you just can keep going for a
really really long time and it's not
that big of a deal
to your question of is there any form of
exercise that gives me that energy book
I I would have to say like the the high
intensity sort of anaerobic blast you
know whether it's on the bike or on the
rower or you know swinging a kettlebell
hard something like that that last 10 15
minutes that's a really good way to you
know Peak my mentality for the day do
you do the cold water thing I mean you
certainly did a lot of it in buds I mean
do you you force yourself into cold
water yeah I have a I have a cold bath
in my house and I get in every day yeah
how long are you spending in there
usually around five minutes five minutes
before you train or afternoon after so
this is something I haven't played with
yet and for me I'm like I'm like such a
I I don't like to make a bunch of effort
for something so for me going downstairs
getting in the ice tub and I guess you
only need to do it before you work out
you only go a minute right you do a
minute to three Joe and I have been
texting back and forth about this
there's a lab at Stanford Craig Heller's
lab that works on cold and performance
and the athletes at Stanford mainly the
the cross country team and the football
players are doing cold before their
training because of the huge increase
huge long lasting increase in dopamine
and adrenaline that's caused by that
they're finding it increases performance
mainly by waking people up and getting
them it creates energy basically and
students you know everyone thinks
they're like oh athletes are all super
motivated this is no pick against
Stanford athletes in particular a lot of
athletes are excellent at what they do
because they're very lazy when they're
not training this is true not all
athletes but a lot of athletes are and
so they're really good at resting and
recovering so they can train more but a
lot of athletes have a hard time getting
into into gear to train every day and
the cold is a great stimulus right it's
a force it's like a four shot of
espresso kind of stimulus without all
the Jitters I think uh maybe going in
there for a minute would be cool before
a workout I will say this so I had
I had like a long workout and it was a
Saturday which means on Saturday I do
Jiu Jitsu kind of in the morning around
10 o'clock and I had like a long workout
went for a long run it was hot and I
just got in the ice bath and I sat in
there for like seven minutes like the
Deep chill I got out and then I went
right to jiu jitsu and I felt awful I
felt absolutely awful like tight cold
and it took me an extra three rounds to
get warmed up again so that kind of left
a bad taste in my mouth for pre-work
icing but I'm gonna try this short
because I was talking to another friend
of mine they're like oh no only go a
minute before maybe I'll give that a try
if it's really cold uh 30 seconds to a
minute is going to get you the this big
release in Adrenaline and dopamine
actually one time I did try you know the
um
the the chamber that blasts cold air on
you the cryo yeah the cryo and I did
that for for like a minute or whatever
and that did make me feel
pre-workout pretty good yeah I think
that the the whole notion of cold for
metabolism you know people say well it's
not that big of an increase in
metabolism look as far as I'm concerned
the main function of the cold for most
people is going to be the discipline of
doing it
the sense of resilience that you can
build up over time just being familiar
with having an adrenaline in your system
and then the fact that the dopamine
increases are huge and long lasting I
mean they're like 2.5 X increases
there's a colleague of mine at Stanford
on Olympic runs our dual diagnosis
addiction Clinic she had a patient
getting off cocaine addiction who
decided to use cold ice baths as a way
to kind of assist himself along the way
you know he wasn't getting dopamine from
cocaine anymore so he decided to get it
from the ice bath the difference is
cocaine gives you these sharp increases
and then decreases that drop you way
below Baseline so what do people do they
go seek more cocaine it's really
pernicious that way whereas the ice bath
and and cold showers will give this long
Arc lasting two to three hours or more
and that's really something to treasure
you know the idea that you can basically
save on your heating bill you know give
yourself this huge dopamine increase and
I think everything points to the fact
that it's healthy and good but I mean
obviously it's working for you to do it
after your training I think all the the
gym rats who want more hypertrophy
you're trying to get an extra you know
eighth of an inch on their tricep or
whatever they freak out because they
hear that it can inhibit hypertrophy and
then for whatever reason there's this
okay so am I doing it wrong well I mean
yeah yeah clearly you're you're doing it
right now no you're not you're I don't
think your hypertrophy is suffering I
actually am of the mind that if you're
training really hard sure getting in the
cold afterwards might blunt some
hypertrophy that is what the data tell
us Andy galpin's kind of the expert on
that literature but frankly I don't know
anyone that trains really hard with the
weights and then gets into the cold it
looks like they're suffering from
hypertrophy I know a lot of people
however who love to point fingers at and
poke at Cold exposure there seems to be
a big thing on social media people who
don't like the cold love to point out
the studies showing that the cold screws
up everything and most of them look like
they need a few sets in the gym to me
and you know and I feel comfortable
poking at them because I feel like all
of these are just tools right and um in
any case I I'm a big fan of deliberate
cold exposure mostly for the neural
effects again I'm obsessing over this
concept of energy and it's something
that I I can't help but ask is that it
is the cognitive side of this and the
kind of the the effects of winning and
losing so you obviously have a lot of
deployments
um and a lot of wins whatever in the
context that meant right kill the target
capture the capture the hostage Etc and
then
um as is the case with war
um there have been some cases of losses
right you've lost people
um maybe there were targets that weren't
accomplished right this kind of thing
and you've posted about these and these
are always
um you know things that are hard to see
but I think it's really
important that you post about people
that you've lost right because first of
all these people served but second of
all that things don't always work out
the way that we wanted sometimes to
really catastrophic consequences
there's a theory in biology that when we
win we somehow get more energy to win
more through the release of no surprise
dopamine and some related molecules in
fact testosterone in both men and women
is another close cousin of the dopamine
system they're actually released from
the same general or the the patterns of
release are from the same general areas
in the brain believe it or not and body
but when we win we feel like we can keep
going right you look at the team that
wins and it's like they'll play another
game the Super Bowl winners or you
imagine they're jumping up and down and
they could probably play another Super
Bowl
losing we know can sure can drop things
like testosterone and dopamine for some
period of time but when you were in the
teams
what was your observation about how
winning and losing would impact people
in the short and long term in other
words Would You observe people that had
a quick reset button and could you say
that was terrible
and then
transmute I guess I'm getting into kind
of the the Eastern language now convert
that into
energy to go do better the next time
whereas we also see people military and
in the civilian world that a loss in
particular severe losses basically set
them down the path of like less energy
it certainly isn't less calories in fact
most of the time it's the other way they
start consuming more calories and that
doesn't get them going so again this
notion of energy and now I'm asking wins
versus losses what did You observe and
from the perspective of leadership and
maybe more importantly from the
perspective of yourself
how do you work with that how do you
calibrate wins and losses how do you
transmute losses into energy because
winds we know convert to energy but
losses oftentimes can sap our energy way
way down
I think
to start with I think that the selection
process to get into the SEAL Teams
is going to weed out a bunch of people
that can't recover very quickly from
something bad so you probably heard
these type of stories before the kid
that was the star of the football team
the star of the basketball team the
captain of this the captain of that he's
been winning his whole life he goes to
Buds and he quits
because in buds you're you're you're not
gonna win you're certainly not going to
win everything they're going to find
what you're not good at and they're
gonna exploit that and you're gonna lose
that's what happens so a lot of guys
that may lose and it disrupts their
their motivation
they're probably just gonna quit
and so that's why you get this massive
attrition rate with guys that are stunts
I mean we're talking
uh division one athletes division one
athlete division one wrestlers division
one football players division one
Runners and swimmers they all come to
buds they all quit not all of them quit
but there's plenty of examples of the
highest level of Collegiate athlete in
sports that translate very well to what
you're doing in in basic SEAL training
and they quit and sometimes it's because
they don't know how to lose they don't
know how to recover from a loss and
they're they're just so so I think
already and once you get to a Seal Team
you've got people that are generally
speaking going to be pretty resilient
when it comes to
dealing with a loss not only that I mean
you just get used you talk about losing
people you're friends with this guy you
meet this guy in Seal training hey this
guy seems like a stud oh he's just gonna
quit and and you're gonna lose five six
seven people eight people people quit so
fast you don't even keep track of them
so you're just gonna lose you're just
gonna get used to it
so there's that now once you're in the
teams
and what you're talking about is now you
start taking much more significant loss
you're not losing a race you're losing
one of your friends and this is what
from a leadership perspective you have
to you have to pay attention to so when
you're in a leader in any organization
you're basically in charge of a mob when
it comes to what their morale is they're
they're a mob and they feed off of each
other just like a mob riding in the
streets going oh we can break this
window let's break all the windows and
they they move this mob mentality and
that happens with morale inside of a
team
and you as a leader can't get caught up
with the mob you can't let that happen
you have to detach yourself from the mob
mentally so that you don't get caught up
in their emotions and their morale
because if you get caught up in their
emotions and you get caught up in their
morale you can't correct it so we go out
on a mission the mission goes great we
get into a gun flight kill a couple bad
guys everyone's okay high fives
everyone's feeling great you come back
to base hey we don't need to debrief
that was perfect hey we don't need to
get our gear you know uh maintained we
can just go to bed we we're awesome
that's when the leader has to say oh
we've got the mob and the mob is
becoming slightly arrogant hey guys real
quick that was a good op but there's
some things we could improve on you got
to bring that mob back and bring them
back to Centerline same thing in the
other direction you go out on operation
it doesn't go well you go out in
operation you take casualties now you
come back to base you see guys moping
around you see that the spirit starting
to break and same thing if you if you're
part of that mob you'll be you'll be
with them your morale will be breaking
your spirit will be breaking you got to
look and say oh I see what's happening
hey guys listen up
that was tough didn't go the way we
wanted it to go we need to learn some
lessons here's some things I can do
better what can we do better to make
sure that that never happens again
what can we do to make sure we have the
opportunity to go out and avenge our
brother on the battlefield what can we
do to move this thing forward so as a
leader when it comes to winning and
losing you're generally going to be the
person countering what the mob mentality
is because when the mob starts winning
they want to keep winning and they might
get arrogant when the mob is losing
they might start to lose more because
their attitude goes down the drain so
that's what you have to pay attention to
from a leadership perspective four
for me personally
I think
I know what I did when when I lost guys
was focused on all right
we need to we need to
celebrate the life we need to move the
law mourn the loss
and then we need to go to work we need
to get our gear back on we need to Lock
and Load our weapons we need to get back
out there
I know that that's what we needed to do
you know so often
the best way to contend with with
problems with issues with adversity
is action is by taking action
the more you sit and the more you wait
and the more time you spend with that
adversity with the upper hand inside
your head
the worse it's going to get
so for me always taking action making
something happen it doesn't have to be
huge it doesn't have to be some Mammoth
you know um
Triumph that you're going to go and go
and pursue but if you say Hey listen
this what happened didn't go the way we
wanted it to we're gonna get our gear
back on we're gonna go back out we're
gonna we're gonna we're gonna do this
other mission
and that's that's what I think I think
taking action and it's in your personal
life too you know something doesn't go
the way you wanted it to go you didn't
get the job you wanted you didn't get
the hire you didn't get the promotion
you can go home and sit there and and
dwell on it that's not getting you any
progress or you say okay you know what
let me do a quick analysis why didn't I
get that promotion oh it's because I
didn't get this qualification or I
hadn't jumped through this gate okay
cool what do I need let me look into how
do I get to jump through that gate so
next time I will get the promotion you
start taking action so action for me is
a cure for a lot of problems that we
have in life
I love this because the image that's
arising my mind I'll share it with you
and tell me where it agrees with and
maybe violates what you're what you're
telling me but what I was imagining when
you were talking about leadership in the
mob is you know a bunch of candles but
not wax candles these are oil candles
you're talking about a win so you know
it could be an op go out and win it
could be a team it could be an
individual taking an exam and they get
an A plus so it doesn't matter
but they're riding High I mean those
wins we know crank up those
catecholamines and it's as if the
intensity that flame starts going up as
a consequence that's natural but the oil
in the candle is continuing to burn down
like you need to celebrate wins but
you're burning that oil and so we're
really talking about here is how to
moderate and then reclaim energy and I
was imagining you as the leader who's
like okay guys great but listen you're
burning that oil right that oil is what
you got you the win let's not just clamp
it like we can you know do a you know a
few fist bumps and you know maybe
celebrate in some other ways but then
let's real let's take the energy we got
and put it to the next thing rather than
just go crazy
drugs of abuse in particular drugs that
tap into the dopamine system namely
cocaine and amphetamine and just because
there's no way to avoid this if we're
being true to the biology the the energy
the dopamine system was designed for
foraging for all sorts of things food so
people that over indulge food or seek
out food sex people that over indulge in
these things they those things and again
this sort of leans to Eastern philosophy
a bit but there's Western Neuroscience
or Neuroscience we should just say to
support it you start to deplete these
dopamine systems the Baseline starts to
drop and so I'm imagining that the
leader you in this case is saying like
listen let's tone it down use the energy
that we've gained and put it to good use
rather than just burn it up enjoying it
and then of course when after a loss
when those I sort of think of the
candles going dimmer and the but the oil
Reserve is still there and it's like how
do you start to tap back into the oil
Reserve well you have to actually ramp
the candle up again you can't just sit
there waiting for the you know the uh
the intensity of the flame to come back
you actually have to do something in
order for that to happen so maybe this
isn't the best analogy because it lacks
sort of like the exactly what is that
the person turning the intensity up and
down on these candles but that's what
comes to mind and in eastern Traditions
there's this idea of chi of energy
energy to fight energy to seek mates
energy to seek food energy for sex
energy to for all of it is the same
energy and I actually believe that the
energy that they're referring to are
these catecholamines I really do now
there are other Energy Systems too
relating to child rearing pair bonding
oxytocin all the kind of like fuzzy warm
stuff that's super important I mean we
wouldn't exist as a species the way we
do if if we didn't honor that Energy
System also and that energy system that
we normally think of as love as opposed
to forward Center of mass synergizes
with this system right like when you're
working with and training with and
um people that you love this could be
your your brothers your sisters whatever
your family there is I think there's an
amplifying effect on this whole thing
right if it's just for more dopamine
just for more money just for more wins
just for more trophies I'll never forget
this as an aside when I was a kid I had
this weird experience where Tony Hawk's
dad rescued me from a skateboard contest
in Linda Vista the Linda Vista Boys Club
everyone else left I was left there
alone I was 14 because of my home life
at that time it's cetera and he was like
where are you going I'm like I'm gonna
take the bus to Lancaster I know this
guy and he was like no no you're coming
to our house
I was like okay so he took me to Tony's
house and I went into Tony's room that
he had grown up in when he lived in
Fallbrook at that time and the room
wasn't filled with Trophies the room was
trophies and I remember just thinking
like holy cow like and when I think
about that and I think about what a
healthy person Tony turned out to be
because it happened to be blessed to
know him a little bit it's amazing
because a lot of people that had those
trophies whatever domain of life
they converted all that into ways to
just burn the oil down in their candle
he's a guy who's still going in his 50s
right so hey man that's a little side
story but I think this notion of energy
to me is so important because as you
said when we move toward action and we
complete something the oil in that
candle starts to get replenished and the
flame Burns hotter I'd like to take a
brief break and thank our sponsor inside
tracker inside tracker is a personalized
nutrition platform that analyzes data
from your blood and DNA to help you
better understand your body and help you
reach your health goals I've long been a
believer in getting regular blood work
done for the simple reason that many of
the factors that impact your immediate
and long-term Health can only be
analyzed from a quality blood test the
problem with a lot of blood and DNA
tests out there however is that you get
data back about metabolic factors lipids
and hormones and so forth but you don't
know what to do with those data inside
tracker solves that problem and makes it
very easy for you to understand what
sorts of nutritional behavioral Maybe
even supplementation based interventions
you might want to take on in order to
adjust the numbers of those metabolic
factors hormones lipids and other things
that impact your immediate and long-term
Health to bring those numbers into the
ranges that are appropriate and indeed
optimal for you if you'd like to try
inside tracker you can visit
insidetracker.com huberman and get 20
off any of inside tracker's plans that's
inside tracker.com huberman to get 20
off what you're talking about and I'm
very interested in this now and I don't
know if there's has already been
measured or not but what essentially
we're talking about is a confidence
level right so if I go out and win
I feel good about it
and let's say I'm doing a jiu jitsu
tournament and the first match I go out
there and I submit the guy in 30s take
him down submit him in 30 seconds I'm
feeling good I'm feeling like confident
right so what does that mean my dopamine
is up because I got that Victory my
testosterone was up because I got that
Victory my confidence is up because I
got that Victory same thing other
direction if I go out first match and I
lose to somebody
my dopamine goes down that chemical
thing goes down my confidence goes down
and what what I have to do is I have to
learn how to maintain a level of
confidence because if I get overcome if
I win that first match win the second I
said I'm going to kill this next guy and
I go out and I'm sloppy and I don't care
that's when I get caught
if I get total if I lack confidence I go
out there and there's nothing I'm gonna
do to beat this guy this is going to be
horrible of course I'm going to get
smashed
so it's it's a similar thing that we're
talking about I just wonder how much if
you start measuring
because they say hey if you win your
testosterone goes up right and then if
you win more your testosterone goes up
higher dopamine goes up high your
confidence is going up but you can get
to a point where your confidence is too
high and now you're getting sloppy and
now you don't care and you know you
mentioned cocaine you know you see like
videos of people that are all coked up
and they hey I can do this they think
they can do everything all possible
they're confident right they're over
they think they can kick your ass that's
like too much dopamine too much ego too
much confidence the other side of the
spectrum is someone that's on some kind
of Downer drug and
they don't feel like they can do
anything they're lethargic their
confidence is low and they're just
depressed so there's an interesting
tie-in between dopamine ego confidence
and probably testosterone that you get
from winning and from losing and once
again as a leader
from a leadership perspective you can't
get wrapped up in that you can't you
can't get wrapped up in that you have to
detach from it you have to be able to
take a step back and then if you're good
even as a competitor you'll say oh yeah
that last match was easy but I need to
prepare for the next match I can't bring
overconfidence look I don't want to lack
of confidence it's a balance right it's
that it's that flame on the oil burning
lamp that you're talking about that you
want that steady flame you don't want
too much is going to burn out of control
you don't want too little the flame will
go out
yeah earlier we talked about this notion
that the some of these older Hungarian
psychologists had which this notion of
generators versus projectors and their
idea was that people sort of divide into
these different categories and the world
needs both it's not a that one is better
than the other but the world absolutely
needs both
and there is this idea now based on some
neuroscience and some other psychology
that I've been kind of lazing into which
is that generators
know how to tap into the system and they
love this system
I think back to your story about being
taken to shop for pants and it turns out
to be a trip to shop for a number of
different experiences for you right a
really telling experience I having it
having an action effect on the world and
something coming back to you that still
sits with you inside in fact there's a
dopamine circuit they're still related
to this you know young woman or then
young woman at that time
some people are generators and I think
that they are more attuned to this
dopamine system and so as we're having
this conversation I'm guessing that
about the estimate is that somewhere
between 50 and 65 percent of people are
going yeah I get it
more workouts is going to give me more
energy I need to do more of that I need
to when I'm back on my heels I need to
think about the things I can complete
Etc and then the other 45 or so or 35
might be saying
I don't really get it now the idea is
that the projectors
can tap into these same circuits
everyone has these catecholamine
circuits dopamine Etc but that they tend
to be more of observers in the world and
they like being partnered with and
symbiotic with these people now this
starts to take on kind of like a
stereotypical masculine feminine things
but this exists on both sides it really
does there might be some biases right by
biological sex there may not be right we
could argue that it's probably an
argument that'll get us into more
trouble than to answers it doesn't
really matter the point is that some
people are perfectly happy to be in the
company of people winning because they
feel good to see other people winning
they like to be a support staff that's
what makes them feel good other people
would rather stick hot Forks in their
eyes than not be the person engaged in
the activity maybe not every activity
but the activity so we're talking about
the generators and the projectors
I think that in the context of
moderating these systems it's so key I
mean it's key to have a long Arc and a
career path military science or
otherwise I think
it's key in every domain of life and I
think for me one thing that I've learned
both the hard way and I've also benefit
from the positive experience of
I think in relationships this could be
romantic relationships but also
friendships and in family they're
because there are generators and
projectors almost always in those kind
of symbiotic relationship you know
romantic couple or a family that you
know some kids are more generator some
are more projectors just by by something
who knows maybe it's hardwired maybe not
as the leader of your family
I'm gonna assume one of the two leaders
but as a leader in your family I'm not
going to make any assumptions here as
the leader of your family
and also as a father in particular
how do you apply these same sorts of
ideas when you know your kid is kind of
down because it's hard to be a 14 year
old or because it was a bad day or when
they're up right I think the upstates
are as interesting as the downstates
like yes like got the degree got the win
how much do you let them celebrate
before you're like Hey listen you know
you just got yourself another couple
milliliters of oil in your candle what
are you gonna do with that you're gonna
burn it are you gonna save it for the
next thing so you can climb the
staircase
well clearly it's a very similar thing
to what I just talked about you know if
your kid is doing well and and wins the
wrestling tournament and is like yeah I
won the wrestling tournament and what do
they want to do they want to eat a
triple cheese pizza right I mean they
want to go crazy and you as a leader and
as a and as a parent and as a friend
need to say hey man I mean you did good
that was awesome you had a great day
but let's start thinking a little bit
about next week too how about we just
have a few slices of pizza right as a
reward
so this is this is the same in any
situation that you could be in
interacting with other human beings you
want to be the person that kind of
modulates the the confidence and the ego
or the way you put it you know the
dopamine and and the celebratory
activities so no matter who you are and
and this goes with yourself as well you
know you you do something you have a
success and you say oh that that that's
great uh but
all glory is fleeting and I need to get
back to work and look and do people go
too far with that sometimes yes
absolutely sometimes people they they
don't stop and celebrate at all and
those are the kind of people I think
that get burned out eventually because
they never say hey that was awesome we
had a big win cool high five they don't
even say that
so I think you know as a leader as a
friend as a parent as a spouse you want
to be able to modulate that help
modulate that don't shut it down you
know your kid walks off the wrestling
mat with for a high five and you say you
could one buy more no I'm not talking
about that or your kid walks off the mat
after losing you say you got what you
deserve no you've got to be the counter
the counterweight to the emotions that
other people have and I think that when
you're when you're doing a good job as a
leader as a friend as a spouse or
whatever you're doing a good job as a
counterweight I think that's a good way
to look at it you wanna you wanna
provide some balance for people to make
sure that they don't get out of control
and you you notice when people
have a downfall it's normally because
they've surrounded themselves with
people that there's no counter to
there's no counterbalance you know if
you were my best friend and I you know I
went out drinking last night and had a
great time and partied all night and met
a girl and you're like heck yeah let's
do it again tonight
eventually where are we going to be
we're going to be in the gutter
somewhere but if you say hey dude that
was awesome but hey remember we got
school on Monday right and you kind of
pull me back that's we we gotta find
balance in life and ourselves and then
and then we got as much as we can
provide balance for other people because
people are emotional and they get caught
up in what they're doing and you wanna
you wanna keep people balanced I think
one of the reasons people are really
drawn to your message and I put myself
in that category you know I remember
2014 was a very different picture for me
it doesn't really matter what the
Contour was but was things were were
working but they weren't working the way
I wanted them to and I remember arriving
at your content first through the Tim
Ferriss podcast then talk then the uh
eventually the jocka Willing podcast
um Joe Rogan podcast those are the big
two ones that kind of like introduced me
to you and your content and it was
really a case of
at the time I didn't have a lot of
friends that were doing similar things
to me or that matched my daily routines
in a way that
um you know I could kind of synergize
with in this way I think one reason why
you are so helpful to people is that not
everybody has these friends you know
someone you can have a friend that's
like let's go out and Tie One On Again a
lot of people don't even have that
friend or they have a friend but they're
not really close with that person
there's some ideas nowadays about you
know like 80 of males don't have a close
friend that they could call I don't know
I mean I'm guessing girls and women feel
the same too you know that a lot of
stuff is superficial and there's a lot
of communication but not a lot of
connection right and so I think that you
and a few other people in the let's call
it social media public face public
facing space serve as archetypes of like
the friend that's going to tell you when
you're up great well let's clamp it
after a while or that when you're down
let's get going and here's how you get
going and so I do want to highlight that
because I think it's really important
and it's but one reason why people are
drawn to your message and the message of
some other people who are out there
trying to do similar things but you in
particular because
yes you have this military background
very intense military background wartime
background but also you bring it into
the daily routines that certainly apply
to everybody you know most everybody can
access
non-heated water right one would hope
um
there's another dimension to this that I
want to just bring up and get your
Reflections on as it relates to Military
Work School relationship family Etc
which is is somewhat
counter-intuitive idea but then once you
hear it it makes perfect sense which is
that even though the catecholamines are
responsible for drive and that that's
what we're really about when we're
forward Center of mass and we have to
control the level the intensity of the
candle and the level of the oil and I
don't know what those actually map to
exactly we could probably figure it out
um if we really parsed it but
that's the the uh the idea here the
analogy
in a kind of
surprising way we know that
for sure one way to restore levels of
motivation Drive
enthusiasm and to some degree confidence
that things could be different
is through deep rest things like sleep
right when things are really really hard
when kids are just like they're like
falling apart you know it's like you put
them to sleep they wake up and they're
like delightful they're like running
around their pajamas when they're little
and a teenager wakes up after a good
night's sleep they might be a little
like Surly but we're back adults are
like this the world is falling apart you
go to sleep wake up okay
I might be able to manage this kind of
mindset
so sleep and then the other one is we
know that
play the sort of the the kind of
physical activity or mental activity
where it might be a little competitive
but the stakes are low and it's really
more about connection with the activity
or connection with somebody else like
we're going to play a game of whatever
you know I won't play chess with Lex
because it'll kick my ass I won't do
Jitsu with either of you because you'll
beat me up both of you kindly but you'll
do it but you know like if we were to
play a game it's just I say yeah we
might be a little competitive but the
stakes are low right
we know that play and social connection
and sleep
are basically the reservoir
or the location that you go to refill
the oil in the candle every single time
and so for you where do those things
play into your routine you know you
mentioned you can go hard all day and
then in the evening
is it dinner with family typically if
you're at home and what does that look
like I know we're kind of parsing in I
don't want to carve into your you know
your personal life too deeply obviously
there are boundaries there but what does
that look like is it everyone at the
table phones away and you're talking
about the day or is it you know yeah
share with us a little bit of what that
looks like because I think it is an
important Contour to what you're about
and what we're talking about that most
people just don't have a window into
yeah so well first of all I mean just
the refilling the tank with games I mean
that's what Jiu Jitsu is right you're
gonna go and you're gonna have social
connection with people you're going to
talk to people that you know you're
gonna joke about whatever then You're
Gonna Roll you're gonna have a good time
rolling you're gonna get a little sweat
on you're gonna feel good then you're
gonna high five like there's huge that
that's there and your brain is kind of
off you know when you're when you're
training Jiu Jitsu at a certain level
you're you're not going to be thinking
anymore same thing with surfing you go
surfing and you you catch a wave I mean
you're you're not thinking about oh I
need to put my balance over here no it's
happening and you're having a good time
so I would say that
restoration for me comes from those two
things is for sure and then yeah I mean
my my wife and my kids when I get home
my kids are older now and they're out of
the house except for one
um
and when I was in the Navy when they
were young I wasn't around at all you
know there wasn't any like we would
rarely have dinner together because I
was gone coming home late you're working
all the time you can never get all your
work done I'm training Jiu Jitsu like it
was we we rarely ate dinner as a family
when I was in the in the teams
and now when when I'm home and we can
eat together for sure you know my my
daughter that's still at home she's
gonna you know we sit out there and eat
dinner and talk about just normal things
that people talk about like you know how
to conduct a night Ambush or no I'm just
kidding let's talk about normal normal
you know daily things and and what's
going on and you know my daughter that's
she's 13 right now then she she talks to
me about all kinds of stuff you know and
it's awesome yeah I'm definitely
enjoying that aspect of being around
more than I was
when I was in the teams and I just we
didn't have dinner we didn't happen so I
would
take my kids to jiu jitsu I taught Jiu
Jitsu classes when I could when I was in
the teams uh would do like workouts with
them in the morning if I had time on the
weekends for sure stuff like that with
my kids that's kind of what I did
but now yeah we my wife is awesome and
she
is a great cook now
because when we first got married it was
questionable I just was harassing her
about this the other day like she she
got she's an unbelievable cook now and
it's awesome and when we first met
to buy her own admission she will tell
you she was not she's from England right
and so they're just not cooking what
we're liking now the food over there at
least when I was growing up in the few
times I made it over there the food was
pretty Dreadful I mean that
um there were some exceptions to that
but and they drank a lot over there so
yeah I've been to some scientific
meetings over there where they would
start with like Sherry in the afternoon
and then beer after work it was
outrageous I mean the amount of alcohol
intake was just absurd yeah sorry Brits
my I'm and again I'm not trying I did an
episode on alcohol a lot of people were
angry about that episode because it
basically said once you get past two
drinks a week you're starting to head
into territory that's
um Can deplete your health so you gotta
do a lot of other things to offset it
but
um they drink a lot yeah the Brits drink
a lot I I have spent time over there
with my father-in-law my brother-in-law
and and we definitely drank a lot so I'm
glad I don't live there and had to drink
with it I'm glad I don't have to drink
with them all the time I'd probably be
dead you were great Edge growing up
right yeah I mean when I was when I was
a kid and then when I joined the Navy uh
I started drinking that's like part of
the culture that I bought into and
you know like I wanted to be a good seal
and I'm looking around at the guys that
were considered good seals oh so we're
drinking okay that's what that's what
we're doing
and that's what I did
tell me I think my uh my you know
looking back now I I didn't really
I didn't think of it as a big deal at
the time I wasn't like well first of all
even when I was growing up and I was
didn't drink and didn't smoke didn't do
drugs
I I wasn't like a guy putting an extra
on my hand although
my friends and I we we all didn't drink
didn't smoke so we definitely look I was
listening to Minor Threat when I was
together I mean I was I I get it but I
wasn't a guy running around
telling everyone I was straight edge you
know but I was on that path for sure and
then when I got in the SEAL Teams
it's like okay this is this is a
different culture I'm not used to it and
I didn't really even
I don't really even understand what
drinking was I mean I'd never I never
had been drunk so got on the SEAL Teams
I was like okay well you know once I
turned 21 okay this this is hey these
guys we're gonna have fun and I kind of
just okay that's what we're doing uh and
then I drank a ton while I was in the
SEAL Teams and then as I band I retired
from the SEAL Teams
and went out we basically went to it
every bar that we would normally go to
like in as seals I think we closed out
the night at the pack Shores in OB
and when went home that morning I woke
up the next morning worked out and then
I just kind of stopped drinking because
and now I just definitely I mean now I
just don't really drink anymore so
um
that's that yeah when I had my lab in
San Diego for five years that's where my
lab started I definitely saw a lot of
Team guys in bars you guys were coming
over come in and take over bars these
were literal takeovers yeah you
basically yeah I wouldn't leave because
I wouldn't like give them the
satisfaction or me the the
dissatisfaction but it was a little
frustrating you know you're in there
you're having a decent time and then
just this enormous pack of Team guys
comes in it's sort of like all right
maybe it's time to close out tonight you
know sometimes I was friends with enough
of them that you know but if you're not
really a part of it you're not really a
part of it and I always knew that and
understood that one thing that
I think really comes through now
especially but throughout our discussion
and all the things I've seen of you and
it gets me back to this thing that came
up at the beginning I'd really like to
return to is that
you seem to have a very strong sense of
context and self
I'll just say it I'm not a psychologist
I'm not here to play one but you know
what you just described was that okay in
one context you know it made sense to be
straight edge you mentioned Minor Threat
great bands straight edge band but when
it came time to
you know you run around with your
friends then and it made sense to be
you know without alcohol or drugs or
anything at that stage and then you get
into another context it's like okay I
can do this I can drink and still
perform well and do all the things I
need to do and then when that closes out
I'm gonna
I'm gonna do something else and some
people are like that because they're
kind of a chameleon right they they're
switching themselves depending on the
context and they're kind of getting
accents when they're in one location or
another but that's not you at all I can
tell with with certainty that's not you
at all that there seems to be a very
strong sense of self so that
when we have a sense of self that's firm
we can go into different contexts we can
even change our Behavior but we don't
lose who we are which means we can
always return to it the image in my mind
is like um I've done a little bit of
scuba diving not a lot but they're
during some of the more advanced
training for us right this wasn't SEAL
training of course was you know
following a line in the dark like a
night dive and you're following a line
and you know sometimes you're navigating
with tools but something you're
following a line underwater and this
idea that like you can let go of that
line but you have you remember where it
is you can return to it that's kind of
how I imagine the sense of self because
in different contexts most healthy
people modify themselves a little bit we
act differently at a wedding or a
funeral than we do in class or out you
know with our friends
of course it's an important part of
being a human a functional human so it
seems to me that from a pretty early
stage you had a pretty good sense of
self
now I don't know if you sit in your room
and meditate on like who is Jocko
willink and like touch that that Central
Court of self I'm guessing you don't but
as I say this I have to ask was there
something in your upbringing your
parents or some or was it just kind of
how you always imagine yourself as like
yeah this is who I am like no matter
what happens around me like I kind of
know who I am even if I'm engaging in
some of the behaviors that I might not
do in another concert like I know who I
am because I actually think that many
people do not have a very firm sense of
self
or their sense of self is so rigid that
they can only operate in this like
narrow trench of one domain of life and
they end up very very isolated so I'd
love for you to kind of share with us
what your Recollections are kind of like
the first time you realized I'm kind of
like yeah like I'm good in a bunch of
different places I'm safe or um whatever
because I think this also relates to
confidence
you know I'm glad you
um are giving me the benefit of the
doubt on going in the teams and and
being like Oh hey man it looks like guys
are drinking and I haven't really drank
before and
seems like these guys are having a good
time let's go have a good time with
these guys and that's kind of what I did
right
um
as far as
and you know I look at it now and
unfortunately for me
you know I look at alcohol now as just
I've seen so I've seen it destroy so
many people that I've now
kind of look at it and go man I don't I
don't think people should drink
um and look I get it I'm kind of an
example like I used to drink and go out
and have a good time and it wasn't that
big of a deal to negatively impact me in
some dramatic way but I have so many
friends that it is horrible for it is
all but ruined their lives and you know
it's totally legal which is kind of
bizarre
um so I think that
figuring that out when I look back and
and the culture and the SEAL Teams was
very
there was very alcohol-centric
and part of that is because you know
that you got like it's just like a
fraternity is alcohol-centric or a or a
a football team is out because you got a
bunch of young dudes that are gonna
drink and have a good time so it's just
sort of a a young dude kind of thing
and unfortunately it ends up ruining a
lot of people's lives and they make bad
decisions and they do stupid things and
it's just not good and I I think the
culture is moving away from that a
little bit in the SEAL Teams
um you know my my
alcohol brief used to say you know I say
tell my guys if you go out you get a DUI
you get put in jail for a fight
you get hurt because you're doing
something drunk
you just did Al qaeda's job for them you
just did Al Qaeda they want to take you
off the battlefield and you just took
yourself off the battlefield you can't
go on deployment now and that would
always hit guys
and I think that that's you know the
seal team's kind of leaning in that
direction more realizing the negative
negativity of alcohol
I wish
I would have realized that earlier I
wish I would have been a better leader
and recognize that at an earlier stage
and recognize that just because I was
kind of getting away with it meaning
it didn't really
I didn't I didn't wake up in the morning
go man I can't wait to get dry I never I
never really had that feeling
I wish I would have realized that
there's other guys that do and
you know there's people that can operate
and be functional and it doesn't really
impact their lives but there's a lot of
people that don't and I don't think it's
worth the dice roll to to start drinking
I just don't think it's worth the dice
for what do you get out of it
so I think that overall that's why if if
when I think about alcohol I just think
about all the all the all the lives that
it's ruined and I don't like it and I
wish I would have done a better job of
saying you know what this is probably
not good and we shouldn't do this and
unfortunately I didn't and I try and
convey that message as much as I can now
and it did bring me back to my roots
because when I was a kid it was like
alcohol is weak and you look at these
guys they they don't know what they're
doing they're acting like idiots I'm not
going to be like that
and so you know as I got older once I
got all the SEAL Teams I kind of went
back to that
uh as far as kind of where I became me I
I just actually have to kind of give a
lot of credit to the music that I grew
up listening to and the attitude that we
had back then listening to hardcore
music
being able to stand up against what
other people were saying which is what
you're doing when you're in that scene
and the whole DIY nature of it hey we we
can just do this ourselves we can just
make this happen for ourselves we don't
need any we don't need anybody else we
can do this
and that hardcore attitude and sticking
by your friends and standing up and
getting in fights and like if that's
what you're gonna do that's kind of my
attitude and I got interviewed for uh
documentary that they're making about
Harley Flanagan and and the cro-mags and
you know when when I was a kid
and actually through my whole life like
that was that music is the soundtrack to
my life and so I always would have that
music running in my head but to your
question
I had something in me that when I heard
that music for the first time
I was like okay here it is you know here
it is this is you know I hear the
Beatles I hear the Grateful Dead I hear
The Rolling Stones I hear the whoever
and you go okay that's fine but when I
heard hardcore music for the first time
when I heard the cro-mags when I heard
Agnostic Front when I heard the Bad
Brains I thought it was that was just
like it was part of me already and then
it was the attitude and and again you
can listen to my podcast with Harley
Flanagan the way I viewed Harley
Flanagan the way I viewed the cro-mags
was not the way they actually were I
mean you know Harley was doing drugs I
mean horrible drugs he was on heroin
everything else but his image was
was like straight edge kind of spiritual
they had all that stuff going on and I
thought okay well that's who they were I
didn't know I'm like a kid living in the
woods in Connecticut I'm just kind of
hearing what I'm hearing he listened to
the lyrics Listen to the lyrics of Minor
Threat listen to the lyrics and you go
okay this stuff I agree with this stuff
and I I just think that that kind of
kind of set my my uh kind of set a datum
in my head
of being okay with being outside being
okay with saying no being okay with
being a rebel being okay with
not going along with what everyone else
is doing and that came that became very
important when I was in the military and
I looked at what
leadership might be telling me to do and
might think to myself hey that doesn't
seem like a good idea and having the the
wherewithal to say hey boss I'm not sure
this is a good idea not to be a jerk
about it but just to say there might be
a better way to get this done what do
you think of this or hey boss can I ask
you a question about that so I I think
if I had to trace it back you know
having Black Flag my War side 2 on my
record player for like a year and a half
straight that's gonna leave a mark man
and I think it left a mark on me
well I love what you just said and when
I say love I really mean it because as
we both know we share a common love for
certain music in particular Minor Threat
and some stuff from the punk rock scene
in particular for me the Northeast punk
rock scene the bruisers you know albar
from the bruisers and now people know
him as the lead singer for the Dropkick
Murphys before that was the Brewers we
run the risk of going deep down a rabbit
hole of music that most people may or
may not be familiar with although most
people have heard of the dropkicks but
yeah I'm right there with you I mean I
remember the first time hearing stiff
little fingers or rancid and
even Bouncing Souls right for New Jersey
not even Bouncing Souls sorry sorry
Brian and Greg like no The Bouncing
Souls and going yes that
that's me that's it like but as you said
it was already kind of in you it's like
a recognition and I bring this up and I
want to highlight it not because we
share this although I do find that to be
an amazing kinship that we felt right
away and was like we probably riff for
25 hours just on that
but it brings me back to this idea that
certainly is not my idea actually the
first time I heard about it was from
Robert Greene who wrote the book Mastery
and um some important writings you know
uh very what was it I think it was the
forget how many Laws of Power but those
books yep Robert Greene Mastery is
actually a book that I highly recommend
people read because it talks about
mentorship and finding mentors and the
fact that we're supposed to break up and
move on from mentors and that mentors
aren't always people that we know or
that know us Etc amazing book really um
but he was the first person I ever heard
described this idea that if we think
back long enough there's some seed
moment they was shopping for the pants
it sounds like it was but also music
where you see something and it's like
yes that's me and I'm that
and then that becomes a sort of
soundtrack or visual image or something
for your life that you carry forward
with you
the neuroscientist in me wants to say
that that is the first time that we
really tap into this dopamine system
in a way that is unique to us
because every child responds to food
with a little bit of dopamine when we're
hungry responds to warmth when we're
cold responds to a warm dry diaper after
we just wet ourselves which we all did
you know I don't know maybe Jocko you
changed your own diapers
um but I'm guessing if someone changed
your diaper at one point not an image
path we need to go down but the idea is
that we all have these Universal sources
of kind of having our needs met going
from discomfort to comfort and back
again which is basically childhood
but at some point something comes along
that we really feel like is unique to us
and it may be the thing that everyone
else likes maybe it's top 40 or whatever
it is maybe it's the shoe that
everyone's wearing and that seems good
but I do think that there are certain
people who are kind of 10 or 20 or maybe
even 180 degrees off from what everyone
else likes and they're like
that thing is what's really cool and
it's a felt thing and so along the lines
of felt things as opposed to
things that everyone values
what are your sources of motivation and
I'm going to guess that some of them are
internal we could Point ahead or we
could point to heart doesn't really
matter but like when you think of
sources of motivation
do you have a palette of them that you
can dip into do you even feel the need
to dip into them or is it really just
all about action steps throughout your
day or if I can even Venture into the
somewhat you know harder stories that
I've heard you talk about do you
sometimes think back and like listen I'm
going to do this because there are a
bunch of guys that are dead now that
can't and so I'm going to do it because
I can what are your what are the paints
on your motivation palette if you will
foreign
probably heard me say that
motivation isn't something that I am
going to count on because it's just an
emotion that's going to come and go and
it's
just like feeling happy you feel happy
right now maybe you won't feel happy in
15 minutes you feel sad now maybe you
won't feel sad in 15 minutes you feel
motivated right now you might not feel
motivated in 15 minutes therefore I
can't rely on it so I'm not going to put
any I'm not going to put any money on
just being motivated because it doesn't
really matter to me
so the daily
actions that I take aren't from
motivation they're they're just from
discipline like like I said earlier I'm
not going to get up and go through some
big debate about well relation do I
really feel like doing this no I don't
feel like doing this but it doesn't
matter so I'm just gonna go do it
now if we start to look at sort of a
broader
movement through life
and continuing to try and move forward
and move on
you know uh
my buddy Seth died and he was the Delta
platoon commander in tasking a Bruiser
and he he died in 2017.
and it was in a parachute accident
and
it was it was I mean it's definitely
unexpected
um and and also he'd already been
through multiple deployments
um was with with us with me in the
battle of ramadi
he then went back into solder City and
and led a ton of very dangerous
operations
and then he did other deployments
and was kind of done with his
deployments kind of done
and now he's just
talking about when he's going to retire
and he's a couple years away from
retirement and you know I'm talking
about hey we're going to work together
again
and it all seems like we're on a pretty
good path to just move forward
and then he ends up dying in in a
parachute accident and he's a guy that
you know was really just kind of you're
you're not gonna be able to replace any
any you can't
there's a uniqueness to him that is
you're not gonna find and you know I've
got some stuff that he wrote
he was an incredible writer and uh I'll
like try and
write something like him I can't we
can't do it because he had a bigger
vocabulary and a more articulate way of
writing and so I can't write anything as
well as he wrote it he was incredible at
Qatar he played guitar
played ukulele like sick like an
incredible
at playing guitar and he's a total
knuckle dragger like a total meat head
knuckle dragger
you know his nickname was unfrozen
caveman because he just he just uh you
know looked like a big caveman and yet
he spoke French and you know could
recite French poetry and was really good
at learning languages and he was an
artist and he had do you know what sin
synesthesia is you know what that is
emerging of the senses so people they
can see colors and so he didn't know
what it was oh sorry see colors I hope
most people can see colors sorry that
can hear colors and
um and can associate particular colors
with sound like different particular
keys on the piano it's it's pretty rare
some people think they have it but true
synesthesics are pretty rare but um they
don't have to fight for this
trait it just kind of emerges for them
he didn't know it but one day he was
talking to me and he was embarrassed to
tell me he's like you know what's weird
is when I when I think of numbers I I
have colors in my head and and I go what
do you mean he says Hollow was zero and
I remember seven is yellow I don't
remember any of them but he just rattled
off like one two three four five six
seven eight nine you know he says you
know Hollow white clear all you know
just rattled off these colors so he had
this this he had that synesthesia and it
gave him some kind of weird ability to
memorize numbers so uh you know he'd be
in a bar and talk to some girl and he'd
say what's your number and he would just
he would know it for two years he would
just know it and that also made him
incredibly good at playing guitar
because now like the scale and the Fret
Board of a guitar is this it's a
mathematical thing that he has all in
this weird
this weird coloration scenario going on
so there's so he's this guy and
you know and and very a very emotional
guy a very emotional guy who would you
know I you know I was talking earlier
about being a balance for someone I had
to balance this dude out on a daily
basis sometimes you know he'd be so mad
about something you know one day he'd be
I hate the teams I hate all these guys
and I'd say yeah I get it man and the
next day up I'll never getting out of
the teams you know he would he would
oscillate that bad and I would tell him
hey you're hey bro you're oscillating
again
and just would do anything and he and he
loved his guys and would do anything for
his guys
and um
so when he died
you know where uh
we're at his we're at his it's not his
funeral it's before the funeral it's
like the um the open casket thing the
Wake thing and
myself
his brother Alex
um
Leif Babin who I wrote extreme ownership
with and JP DaNell who's one of my
brothers
who who works with us at Ashland front
now is with us in ramadi and was very
close to Seth and we're like everyone
kind of cleared out for us
and um
we we go in there and I think JP gave
him JP had one of those Memorial
bracelets
with guys names on it that had died in
JP uh gave that to him and I think Leif
gave him some surf wax because also Seth
was a was a surfer
and um and I gave Seth his black belt
because he started training Jiu Jitsu
with me and he had he had his purple
belt he'd gotten his purple belt I gave
his black belt and um and everyone's
just quiet
and
you know JP was telling the story the
other day
um
and and I just said
we will not fail him
meaning
that
him
mark
Mikey
Chris Seth and
countless other guys
date they're not here they don't have
the opportunity to do the things we do
they don't have they only have the
opportunity to get up in the morning
so
that's what it is man
I won't fail those guys
thanks for sharing that
um
yeah thank God
anyone listening to this uh
feels what I feel right now which is
it's very clear that the
the depth of emotion for people that we
care about and lose is has everything to
do with our love for them
there's just no question about it right
the grief and love are so in
intimately tied they've they are a
direct reflection of one another and I
you know I
hesitate to kind of stay on
hard themes but I think it's really
important
um
for a couple of reasons
last time we spoke it was in your office
and um your podcast and after we wrapped
up we started talking about some people
we know and some things that had
happened in your community and kind of
spooled into some discussions about
things that happened in nearby
communities and
civilian culture and you know
one of the things that's so perplexing I
think to people
um
including me but maybe with time less so
and it this actually came up last night
in a discussion um at home
because of some recent events not close
to me but just that you know some people
go through things where there's loss
they go through life and there's
hardship I think most people experience
some hardship certainly some more than
others
and
every once in a while
and far too often and even in the Seal
team community and even in the various
communities within the Seal team
Community where one would never expect
it
all right these are highly trained tight
community
hard guys right that's the language
some we sometimes hear but as you
pointed out these are people often that
have tremendous emotional depth I'm so
glad that you brought that up because I
think we uh
you know we sometimes think of his
motion as weakness but you know there
was a time
not long ago 40 50 years ago where
emotions like jealousy and intensity
think the character Sonny and The
Godfather like he would get so pissed
his own fist right that's pretty
emotional response
um where intensity and emotion were kind
of interchangeable words right
at some level
I'm gonna be direct
there have been a lot of guys that come
out of the SEAL Teams I've been
surprised to hear that kill themselves
and yesterday there was a major suicide
I didn't know this guy in particular we
actually followed each other on social
media but I admittedly was not close to
him didn't know him didn't know him at
all in fact his name was twitch or
something and he was this guy was a he
was a public-facing figure but listen
happens all too often and it even
happens in former operators
and suicide's something that fascinates
me and intrigues me and scares the hell
out of me because for the life of me I
cannot
map it to any specific thing in the
brain or body that we're aware of
and yet my I've had several friends
commit suicide had my undergrad advisor
commit suicide the point is not them
were their story the point is
what in the world dictates whether or
not somebody who has a community
who's doing well and then less well
decides to offer themselves to end their
own life
versus you know decide I'm going to keep
going I mean this is I'm raising this as
a question I wish I had an answer I used
to have ideas like oh it's time
perception you know when these people
are so Mis feeling so miserable that
they feel it's going to go on forever
but then you start reading the
literature on suicide and I've started
to go into this for those of you that
can stomach it and I don't know that I
want to recommend this movie but I'm
just going to say it exists the movie
The Bridge where they fixed the camera
on the Golden Gate bridge for a year it
turns out one person a day on average
tries to jump off you talk to a guy who
survived it by the way he jumped off the
moment he went off there he thought I
wish I hadn't done that he survived this
kid with bipolar bipolar disorder
especially males 20 to 30 times higher
incidence of suicide
massive you know
increase
the point is that
there's something that happens in the
brain
where somehow people also will get the
idea and you hear this that this is like
something they're excited to do
or that they're going to write the world
somehow by doing this or that somehow
it's like a gift to themselves again I'm
not encouraging anybody to do this I
want to be very clear but these are the
things that you hear and
sadly your community has lost a number
of people through
suicide
and yet there are a lot of guys that
thrive
and so more as a template for trying to
understand mental health and depression
and suicide what are your thoughts on
why some people seem to thrive
and some people just go all the way down
clearly there's a that's a very complex
question and there's probably a lot of
different answers and
I certainly am not one to be able to
answer that question
however
um
probably where my where my thought has
gone on this lately because you know
I've known some guys that have killed
themselves and I've been to tally
shocked
but and just been completely and totally
shocked that guys that I knew killed
themselves guys that you you would think
oh this guy would would never do this in
a million years
and that's the feeling I've had a lot
about a lot of the guys that I know that
have killed themselves
I had a woman on my podcast named Sarah
Wilkinson and she's an awesome woman and
she was married to a seal his name was
Chad I didn't know him
um
he killed himself
he and and to hear her describe the
story
the the shocking thing about the story
is
that the guy that she knew the guy that
she married
was not
the same guy that killed himself
something happened
to him
that made him a different person
and
look they're they're getting all this
information now about CTE and the the
the brain trauma that you go through
and people are exposed to that
and I think you know if you've ever seen
you know George Foreman he seems totally
normal and good to go right and Muhammad
Ali not so much and I've I've known
Fighters and you can look at any number
of boxers that have had a career and
some of them are fine and some of them
have some real significant
what is it pugilistic
um there's a pugilistic syndrome right
they've they've been punched too much
and they have problems so different
people you can expose different people
to blast
blast impact and it's going to have a
different impact over time
and I think that you know again to hear
Sarah explain that story
and what she saw from her husband and
how different he was when they got
married
compared to where they ended up
it's totally different a totally
different person
I had another friend of mine on who
named Marcus Capone and his wife came on
with him and she said the same thing
like the guy that she married
was not the same guy that was ready to
kill himself and and he didn't
thankfully
diff it was a different person and it's
not look
you know if this you know Fred is
married to some woman and Fred and
Jessica grow apart over time and and he
ends up with some other girl he's still
the same guy right it's still the same
guy that is now look they grew apart
they're getting divorced we get it but
the way that both of them described
their husbands as being different people
it that's what stuck with me more than
anything else
so I you know again I'm I'm throwing
this out there only because it's what
I've observed through the people that I
know
and and seeing and hearing those stories
of
people being totally different
um and and I've known a few people
one of my friends Dave killed himself I
never I never would have guessed in a
million years that Dave would have
killed himself
it just it doesn't compute it doesn't
compute
and so my suspicion is there has to be
something going on
mechanically or chemically with the
brain that causes them to get into a
mode where they're depressed and they
don't see a way out
and that that's the way they feel now
and again what's what's interesting
about this is we already talked about
the fact that the selection
the selection process weeds out guys
that are going to take a loss and not be
able to get get up again no you've got
seals seals can take a loss and get back
up again that's what you learn how to do
in bit or that's what you you don't
learn how to do it you you have it and
if you make it through that training you
have that ability to take a loss all
right cool Shake It Off get back up keep
going they're going to do that to you
so now you've got guys that are taking a
loss and they don't see a way out
anymore in fact to such a point that
they're going to take their own lives
it's um
I I my suspicion is at some point
they're going to figure out that that
this exposure to
ex you know to the adrenaline the
explosive the explosions all the time I
mean you go out to a range just just in
in peace time you go out to a range and
you shoot a Carl Gustav
and you're a range safety officer so you
go out there with every guy that's
shooting Nicole Gustav it's a big giant
like bazooka looking weapon and every
time you shoot it kind of rattles your
cage a little bit well if you're an A
Range safety officer and you're out
there and you're going to watch everyone
in the platoon shoot three of those
it's going to have an impact then you go
overseas and you're a breacher or you're
part of a breach team I mean at a time
where
one of my guys
we're we're doing an assault on a
compound I'm on the ladder like most
buildings in Iraq have a wall around
them so the way we would conduct these
rates put the ladder up you CL the
assault the breach team would climb over
the ladder and I would go right behind
the breach team and I would stand on the
ladder so I'm looking at the building
observing making sure there's no one
waking up make sure there's no threats
and then as I'm watching this guy in
particular he puts the breach on the
door explosive breach so he's going to
blow the door up he's got his little
team with him
he he puts the breach on the door he
starts to back away and there's like an
obstacle there was like a freaking table
or a lawn chair or something and he
couldn't get around it
and I'm sitting there it's dark I mean
it's the middle of the night it's two
o'clock in the morning and I'm like I
wonder what he's gonna do I seemed kind
of stuck for a second and then I just
see him lay down and I'm like oh he's
just gonna take this thing and sure
enough you know three or four feet away
from this breach point he lays down and
just Clacks off this explosive charge
and I jump over the wall and as I'm
going in and I'm trying to you know get
the rest of the platoon to go and
commence this assault I look at him his
he looked like he just got you know hit
in the head with a baseball bat
and guess what he did the next night
another breach on another Target guess
what he did the next night another
breach on another Target
so you get guys that have that exposure
which is I mean every seal is eating a
breach I mean you're eating flashbangs
you're eating breeches you're shooting
50 cows like you're you're eating some
some traumatic brain injury but then you
you must have some people that have some
sort of genetic uh propensity to have
this negative thing happen and and I I
can only guess man that this has
something to do with it because
otherwise
you know we wouldn't be hearing so many
of these stories and and of course we're
just talking about the SEAL Teams we're
not talking about the military writ
large which is in the same exact boat
I'm also nervous
about the social contagion of suicide
within the veteran Community I I'm
nervous about that it's one of the
things that makes me apprehensive about
talking about it but I obviously I've
talked about I've had people on my
podcast to discuss these things
um but I I am worried about that social
contagion of man you know Fred did it
you know he got all this attention and
he doesn't have to deal with anything
anymore
I'm gonna do it too there's got to be
some level of that going on as well
so it's it's a it's a horrible situation
yeah the social contagion part is one
that hits home from a different
dimension the high school I went to
which is name isn't important by gun
High School g-u-n-n gun High School is
famous for being one of the better
public high schools not that I attended
as much as I should have I tell you more
about the curbs in the parking lot that
I could tell you about the classes I
took and that's just not encouraging
people to not attend high school please
do it took a lot of really hard work to
climb back up to where I should have
been when I graduate but it has an
Infamous reputation versus a reputation
as an Infamous school because it's one
of the highest suicide rates in any any
of the schools in the country because
there's a train tracks that run through
town and there was a kind of a contagion
of kids throwing themselves on the train
tracks this was happening a lot this is
written up in various newspapers Etc
fortunately it seems to have died down
again I'm also hesitant to like talk
about this because no one wants to spark
this but there does seem to be something
about lack of ability to see into a
future obviously or the future that
people are seeing into is so dark that
somehow they lose touch with the idea
that emotions come and go you said it
about emotion like about motivation
emotions come and go but somehow people
lose touch with that and then I I will
venture a guess and here I'm hoping
someone's going to figure this out at
some point so we can have a more
concrete conversation about the
mechanisms and what to do about it but I
think there's also something about
identity
about
um loss of a place to put one's energy
you know some something useful in the
world you know if you're a general what
you're talking about here are guys that
that are generators right they are not
projectors they're generators they they
live to have a effective action on the
world for good and then end up killing
themselves in youth it's a little more
complicated to put it put a finger on
you know because what what's going on
there we assume depression but then in
learning more about suicide there's also
this kind of like excitement of for
certain people about solving something
that seemed unsolvable any other way and
again I'm not certainly not encouraging
this I strongly discouraging people from
taking their own life obviously
but something about time and the loss of
perception about time and one thing that
we know for sure here we can really hang
our hat on something is that if you do
the forensics on somebody that was
suicidal attempted or took their life
in the preceding days and weeks their
sleep wake schedule was completely
whacked they they exit the normal
routine of most people they isolate
through
inversions of time and I do wonder
sometimes whether or not the vampire
shifts as they're sometimes called the
nighttime deployments and the back and
forth I mean that's a lot for a system
to take uh shift workers kill themselves
far more than non-shift workers
um so I do think there's something there
and again I'm not saying everyone needs
to be in bed by nine and up by four and
you know although that would be a great
schedule for most people but I do think
that there are some universal laws of
what makes the human body and brain
healthy
and if you violate those laws long
enough
with CTE or with disruption in your
schedules you run the risk especially if
there's a predisposition there and then
other factors start to layer in again I
I and I have to apologize because I
don't have any real answers or more
biology or psychology to firmly throw
out this except the warning for people
who are bipolar and know somebody with
bipolar they are 20 to 30 times more
likely to kill themselves and males in
particular are more likely to use
methods that will kill them the first
time as opposed to survive there's a big
sex difference there yeah the you throw
alcohol in there too
um you know
and and Marcus has run an organization
now where they're taking they're taking
vets down to do the Psychedelic
um what they call a journey yeah this is
veteran Solutions yeah they're a great
organization yep and I should mentioned
very bipartisan organization I went
attended one event on Coronado and there
were people from the far left the far
right politicians and everything in
between talking about how critical this
is so this is not a political issue this
is a this is a mental health issue yeah
and even when I reflected on Marcus
talking to me
he was talking about how he's kind of in
this downward spiral part of the
downward spiral he was drinking every
day and I'm thinking to myself
man like I didn't think of it during the
show I kind of was thinking about it
afterwards I was thinking man like
you're Dr if you're drinking all the
time
you're on a downward spiral like that's
one thing you should just
stop let's stop that immediately so I
just wanted to throw that out there I
think when when that's another sign from
the outside looking in if someone's
self-medicating with alcohol it's it's
not a good place not a good place
they're not in a good place and they Pro
they could probably use some help I
appreciate you saying it again we did
this episode on alcohol I went into it
totally open-minded I've never been a
big drinker I've had it I can drink or
not drink it was never really into drugs
um at all you know dabbled a little bit
when I was younger I regret it frankly
brain is plastic early on I didn't need
that never did hard drugs never touched
cocaine amphetamine or anything like
that so
um and if I had I would say right I
think I'm comfortable enough in my
position in life that if I had I'd
certainly say but
I think that it's pretty clear that
alcohol is bad for us has certainly
passed a certain you know to drink a
week limit people especially with it
propensity for alcoholism or who are
dealing with other issues that's
especially the case for not drinking
right and I guess you know we got into
some um hard territory here but I I
think if this conversation
cues up an awareness to anybody which I
hope it would
um either people that are in that space
of wondering if they should continue or
not or that know somebody who might be I
do think that
the takeaway is very clear which is that
you know
there are ways to avoid these traps and
to avoid making these traps worse and I
think we regular sleep wake schedules
understanding that and I wrote this down
that you know you've particularly have
said several times today rather than
looking for sources of things outside
you like a job or a relationship which
are all great
um but as sources of energy or
motivation or inspiration to use action
as a positive action as a source of
energy I think is it just a if I would
if I could like put that up on a
billboard in Times Square I would right
and I put your name next to it um which
is that action is a positive action is a
source of energy that then you can
recycle into more things I think yeah
going back to the fundamentals right
yeah and and positive action is when you
have to contend with something when
there's something that you're afraid of
right step into it move towards it that
that's how you're going to solve that
problem you don't you don't solve
problems by running away from them you
solve them by moving towards them and
figuring out what's going on and and I
mean alcohol is obviously clear way to
avoid the problem at least for the next
four hours and you wake up and that
problem's still there and that's not
that's not good but you know we've got
some kind of a problem and listen then
we could get go down the whole path of
talking about the indirect approach
which is a theory of combat which I
completely believe in but it also
applies to you know interacting with
other people if you have a problem with
some other person to think to myself
well I got I got a problem with Andrew
I'm gonna go confront him on it and that
might not be the best solution in fact
it's probably not the best solution for
me to go confront you with the problem
because now we're going to have a
confrontation it might be better for me
to take an indirect approach and not
confront you but instead engage in a
conversation with you about something
that's maybe adjacent to the problem
that I have and then eventually that
builds our relationship to a point where
you start to recognize oh I bet Jocko
feels something about this thing and we
can move towards a solution instead of
me trying to punch you in the face with
some truth that I believe versus the
truth that you believe now we're engaged
in combat and that's bad there's going
to be casualties I'd rather take an
indirect approach and build a
relationship where we can solve problems
in a more positive way
I love that and I love it because it
really speaks to the power of thinking
carefully and being patient and a little
bit slower at times
I also heard you say something earlier
that's still flagging in my mind which
is you know not thinking too much
I think
seems to be a time where thinking too
much is very dangerous and again we can
keep the discussion that we were having
about mental health or we could even
just call it what is mental illness I
think everyone would agree suicide is
some reflection of an unhealthy state
we can keep that in the backdrop as we
talk about this but this isn't
necessarily only about that
you seem to have an ability to engage in
things without thinking too much and yet
also to sit back and be pretty uh
observant
and
you've talked about third personing of
the self I'd love to talk a little bit
more about this even though it's a topic
you've delved into before and in
particular the topic of meditation I've
been reading more about meditation
I've meditated for different stretches
in my life different amounts of time and
there are two basic forms of meditation
that I only recently learned about
one is a focused attention meditation
you're sitting closing your eyes
focusing on your breath body body
surface or even a visual Target in your
environment and just focus and we know
that that enhances one's ability to
focus
if you do too late in the day it also
enhance your ability to not fall asleep
right A lot of people don't realize that
meditation too late in the day if it's a
focused meditation you're just ramping
up the activity in the prefrontal cortex
it's a great tool for getting better at
focusing but then there's also this type
of meditation
called open Observer meditation where
you purposefully don't include a Target
in your mind or in your vision or in
your hearing and you just sit there eyes
closed your eyes open and you go into a
place of whatever comes up
cool
but you don't hover there too long the
goal is to not hover on any one thing
which sounds like deliberate attention
deficit disorder but it's actually a
pretty cool method it turns out
for restoring our ability to engage in
Focus but also for one particular thing
that you mentioned earlier which is
creativity and creative problem solving
which of course requires accessing let's
just say more colors on the palette than
your vision might be on realizing oh
there's also all these other colors over
here in the periphery that I'm missing
because I'm hyper focused
do you meditate if you do meditate is it
more of an open monitoring or a focused
meditation and if you don't do a kind of
standard meditation are there times
throughout your day and your routine in
your week where as I'm describing this
it maps to something that kind of feels
like open monitoring or focused
meditation yeah so no I don't meditate I
haven't ever I don't think I've ever
actually meditated for one second in my
life and I I and I refuse to no no it's
not that at all I know Sam Harris sent
me his app and he and we were going to
do a podcast and I said dude I'll do it
for two weeks and we'll do a podcast and
and I'll be more enlightened and
everything and I didn't even give Sam
Harris two weeks you know so I still owe
Sam Harris two weeks on his app of
meditation so we can see how it impacts
me uh but no I've never done it before
I've never tried to do it
in that being said if the goal is to
take a step back and detach from what's
going on I do that all day every day and
so you know that's that is something
that I've talked about it's something I
tried to teach you know I tried to teach
the young seal leaders
not to get caught up in what's happening
right in front of them but to take a
step back detach from the situation
detach from their emotions see
more of what's Happening you know you're
talking about seeing more colors of the
palette well on the battlefield I want
people to be able to see more angles
more Maneuvers more opportunities more
of what the enemy might do more
perspective that's what that's what I
always try to achieve and so I'm sorry I
apologize I can't give you any good
discussion on meditation because I
haven't haven't tried it no apology
necessary
but I will ask when you go surfing and
you're sitting in the water waiting for
a wave are you focused on one particular
location on the horizon or are you kind
of in kind of a
um open monitoring just enjoying just
bouncing up and down in the water like
where is your attention during
activities like that yeah so surfing
oftentimes surfing you you you're a
monkey mind and you're just not thinking
about anything same thing with Jiu Jitsu
also with surfing you know if you're
waiting for a wave your your mind is
just going I mean it's it's in Another
Universe sometimes as you're sitting
there waiting because you're just
looking out at the Horizon and you're
you're mine I mean my mind I'm thinking
about all kinds I I have to come I have
to come home sometimes and like write
notes because I thought of this I
thought of an idea I thought of a
perspective that happens to me at Jiu
Jitsu that happens to me talking to
people where someone's talking about
something I'm like oh I got a good idea
right now I'm gonna go write that down I
have to go and write it down I have I
have notes in my phone you know like
pages and pages and pages of notes in my
phone of ideas that I have and I write
them down do voice memo things or no I
type them yeah I only need to type like
seven words on on and then I have the
whole ideas in my head so yeah I put a
lot into the notes in my phone as well
and it probably looks like gibberish to
a lot of people but I I go back through
them when I'm on the plane
especially problems I was challenged
with 10 years ago or something and I
look like oh my I'm stealing with the
same thing different situation same same
me
right yeah there's that we had a uh
amazing psychiatrist on the show uh but
I'd love to hear a conversation between
the two the two of you his name is uh
Paul Conte he was trained at Stanford
and Harvard he's an amazing guy
as she talks openly about the the
tragedy that his brother killed himself
which was what drove him into Psychiatry
and
um he's an interesting guy because he's
obviously Highly Educated incredibly
smart he wrote a book on trauma but he
has incredible knowledge about a number
of other areas of psychology including
narcissism sociopathy he's worked in a
lot of really interesting domains with
interesting people that everyone
listening on those podcasts would
recognize of course he's not going to
reveal who those people are but
um and
you know he talks about the fact that
you know you can look at different
people right he was actually the one
that shared with me this notion of
generators and and um projectors and
directed me towards that literature but
when he came on the podcast he you know
he talked a little bit about that stuff
but he talked mostly about trauma
but then you know we were talking about
ways in which people engage in the world
and different archetypes and how you
start looking at
stories throughout history and you start
seeing the same themes over and over
right
um westerns you know this idea of a guy
rides into town and does some repair
work like defeats the Sinister
person or things that are imposing all
the time then rides to the next town
it's always like it ends with is it
going to keep continuing and then but
then when we got into this discussion of
relationship he talks about you know he
said this on the podcast of a patient
who you know said you know I've um I've
been in 10 abusive relationships and
he'd say to that patient no you've been
in one relationship 10 times right which
is essentially it's all about
your issue right that's um not you I'm
not purposely didn't point at you for
those listening
um and I think that those features of
ourselves that we bring from from
condition to condition can be negative
or they can be positive one thing that's
interesting and here I'm not trying to
solve or understand the Seal team
Community per se but I think they
represent an important archetype because
they are selected for this ability to
take
uh hard conditions and failures and turn
them into wins that's one of the
selection criteria seems seems to be
they're finding who has that capability
I see a lot of and happen to know a few
people from the SEAL Teams who
get out and do really well
yeah the great businesses you're a
shining example of this and you have a
family and you know you got German
Shepherd too yeah we'll talk about
animals a little bit you got dog it's
like you surf and you train and like I'm
sure you have your Dark Places dark
moments and challenges like anybody else
but things look to me like they're going
pretty well and then I also know people
in the from the SEAL Teams okay they
don't go down the path of suicide
fortunately but it's sort of like
they don't do as well as I would have
thought and I'm certainly not picking on
this community I also see this from
people who are professional athletes I
know kids that were phenomenal in high
school I mean these were like early
admission to all the Ivy League schools
because that was what happened in the
town that I grew up in and I look at
them now and I'm like wow like
gosh it didn't somehow it's not working
out and I think it's important for
people to hear that that you know yes
winning creates the propensity for more
winning but then why do you think it is
that
in a community where people are trained
to solve problems adapt and make things
work some people flourish outside the
military and some flourish less and some
we already talked about really you know
go down the dark traps what do you think
is the quality that allows people to be
really adaptable in particular
because most of us live in a landscape
where we have to deal with people who
are not us
like people that are not good at what
we're good at and sometimes that's an
asset sometimes it's not you seem to be
particularly good at like understanding
the human animal and working with that
so again this is a broad question we're
going very broad band here and we'll get
narrower again in a little bit but I
love your thoughts on like why is it how
is it
what determines whether or not somebody
thrives in novel environments
I have to start off by just by saying I
wrote a note as you were talking I just
put seal and then I put the not equals
sign you know like because you can't say
that a seal equals anything right
excellent point it's I mean there's guys
there's guys that have been in the seal
teams that are are murderers like
there's uh like real life murder like
murders like rapists and murders that
went through Seal training rapist
murders and they're in prison for the
rest of their lives like that that's a
thing there's people that have been in
the SEAL Teams that uh you know got
kicked out of the SEAL Teams for drugs
and I mean do you name it and we've got
that and we've got guys that are just
lazy and we've got guys that it just
it's just in Physicians you could say
this about Physicians they're been
sociopathic
um you know uh serial killer positions
And Then There are ones that are in
third world countries right now that
would would not accept a billion dollars
to stop serving people at the level of
the basic medicine that they they
deserve so there's a yeah there there's
the seals that get out and just
volunteer to go help in the worst places
in the world so you've got a full
spectrum of people
so to say a seal equals success in any
domain the only domain you can say that
they're successful is they've made it
through basic SEAL training because guys
make it through basic SEAL training and
they're not good seals right that
happens you know so you get guys that
make it through basic Seal training and
they make it through seal qualification
training and they make it to a seal team
and they get kicked out of the SEAL
Teams because they're not good seals
they weren't meant to do that job
that happens so all they've proven by
making it through basic skill training
is they can kind of suck it up for a
while and there's also guys that make it
through basic SEAL training because they
learned how to maneuver through the
system they learned what to do and what
the minimum requirements were and how
they could skate through this there's
guys like that it's it's not a huge
number but they're absolutely there we
see them in science you know people that
go to a lab figure out who the director
of the lab is at the level of psychology
and this is actually one of the more
dangerous aspects of science it actually
negatively impacts all of society I'll
just say it and any scientists will know
what I'm talking about they find the big
famous labs they figure out who that
leader of the lab is and they get that
person the data they want they might not
make the data up but they will certainly
discard the data that don't fit right
that which is one way of making data up
by exclusion right it's not literally
like painting pictures of cells that
aren't there or something but that
happens a lot and those people often go
far they rarely go all the way because
pretty soon
their reputation you know expands to the
point where people go like yeah no one
can repeat that result like that but
these people sit in very high positions
not at Stanford right I will say I don't
know any of my colleagues at Stanford
that that meet that those criteria but
you see them and you see what they're
doing and they're basically solving a
social engineering thing they just
happen to be doing it in science now why
anyone would do that in science I don't
know because you don't get rich in
science you certainly don't get famous
but for whatever reason they figured it
out that that's where they're going to
do it and I'm sure you see it in law
firms I'm sure you see it in every
single domain yeah now you pointed out
that there's some people that make it to
the Ivy League schools and they graduate
from Ivy League school and they don't do
well and to me that's very similar to
someone that might make it to the SEAL
Teams do well in the SEAL Teams and then
they get out and they don't do well
it's probably because what I talked
about earlier when I went to Navy boot
camp here's what you got to do if you do
it well you'll be rewarded well if
you're in high school and your dad your
mom and dad say hey if you do good in
high school you're going to get into
this Ivy League school and you get into
that Ivy League school and here's what
you need to do in high school you need
to get good grades you need to be part
of the Glee Club you need to whatever
the things are that you got to do you
got to speak a different language you
got to go volunteer in in Guatemala in
the summertime you got to do these
things and then you'll get into the good
college once you get in the good college
you got to get this degree once you get
that degree so they've had a path laid
out for them of boxes to check and they
go and check the boxes and then when
they get done
no one has put any more boxes out in
front of them so they don't know what to
do and and that can certainly happen
from in the from someone in the SEAL
Teams or someone in the military that
what they've been hey this is your
mission this is what you got to do
here's what you need to do do it well
check the box check the box check the
box check the box and it's time to
retire and there's no one putting a box
in front of them to check and so unless
someone you know some guys get out of
the SEAL Teams and they go into a big
corporate structure and they kick ass
because there's someone in the corporate
corporate world saying hey here's what
you got to do next year and they do
great and that's super good for them and
they actually really like it I was
talking to a guy the other day he's like
a full-on in a corporation he's doing a
great job he he likes what he's doing
it's awesome
so but I think you get some guys that
that they they don't really have the
open mind to see where opportunities are
and they you know one thing is nice
about the SEAL Teams is
it's there's a lot of you get a lot of
freedom of maneuver right you can really
do a lot of stuff that you kind of want
to do
and so when they look at the corporate
world they don't see that and they think
I don't I'm not going to do that but
then they're not quite sure
how to take the next step so I think
that's why you might see some guys that
aren't super successful because
they don't really know what to do
and they don't really have a mind that's
open to look for opportunities
and and also you got some guys that
success for them is they're going to
hang out with their family and they're
going to you know get in good shape and
they're gonna run some triathlons or
competing whatever they're going to do
they're going to go do it and that's
what they're looking to do you know
which is which is also awesome go take
time go enjoy your family man you gave
enough to your country go go hang out
with your kids that's success as far as
I'm concerned too
I agree there I know far too many people
who are successful in their professional
lives but who have very diminished
personal lives and it is not a pretty
picture you know they you mentioned the
um the parent kind of driving the kid do
this do that in that scenario I sense
tones of fear it's all about not being a
failure it's not actually about love of
your craft or what you enjoy pretty
early in my science career I learned
that there are certain people are just
ambitious they just like to win and I
used to joke around it's not polite but
I used to go you know what we should all
just tell that person that like the new
cool thing is like trying to understand
the biology of like and I would say like
feces or something and they'd probably
work on it and they'd be like yeah it's
like the greatest thing because they
actually don't care what they're working
on for them it's just the hunt and I
learned that actually people like that
can serve an important role because
you liked well there's actually a whole
microbiome there are actually Labs that
do work on feces so forgive me my micro
colleagues that work on microbombs but
in all seriousness you know people who
are just ambitious can be very effective
because you put a problem in front of
them it's like a dog they'll just
retrieve it's like there's just go as
opposed to love of retrieving uh for
retrieving's sake it's like you give you
give it that same dog the analogy here
would be give that same dog a high jump
and then like into high jumping right or
whatever it is or diving underwater but
I think of people more like animals and
more like different dog species like we
as your case was with music particular
music and communities or example of
shopping for the pants and that
experience it like the first time you
tap into something it really feels kind
of unique to you you're like there's
something here
to be able to find work that includes
that but also is hard and also allows
you to evolve over time I mean I think
that's that's the real that's the real
gift that I think most people are
seeking and of course there's no
shortcut to that except perhaps one
which is to be able to sense the
difference between ambition and there's
no better word for it let's just call it
what it is which is love like I I love
this and the reason I think that love is
so powerful and here I'm sounding like
Lex Friedman but I don't mean
interrelational love I I mean like sort
of that being able to sense what that
feels like is that
I do believe that it allows us to tap
into
an enormous number of things that
fear alone and ambition alone and just
being a hard driving person alone will
not allow us to tap into things like
adaptiveness creativity and there's and
I think there's a really obvious reason
for it which is that the one thing we
know about our species is that we want
to make more of ourselves and to take
good care of our young whether or not
everyone has kids or not is irrelevant
the point is that every species not only
wants to do that but need to do that and
the feeling of Love is really what
allows us to be adaptable I don't think
there's anything that trains up
adaptability as much as being around
kids
you just have to be adaptable right
because they're one moment they're up
then they're down then they're
disappointed so you know you and you
shared a a really important story about
loss of somebody that clearly you loved
and that clearly loved the community he
worked in
it wasn't just that you guys loved him
it's that he got he loved you guys and I
think that being able to tap into these
feelings of love for things for people
and for experiences I think is so
critical and you know I don't meditate
much these days but I have heard of this
like love and kindness meditation and I
would sound so soft to me I was thinking
like gosh what am I supposed to do then
float like levitate at the end and like
wear you know or whatever it's called or
I don't know what's the thing but I my
friend um who I'm fortunate to call a
friend not trying to name drop here but
I'm very fortunate called Rick Rubin the
music producer a friend and he was the
one who started turning me on to
different forms of meditation the ones I
mentioned before and this idea that
there are forms of meditation which put
us in touch with what he calls the
source
now this is really getting a little
mystical but I think this all maps back
to the same thing which is that there
are sources of dopamine and the other
neurotransmitters in us that give us
kind of a superpower to adapt to
anything and I think it's
at least includes
love because that's the most adaptable
Emotion by definition because of what's
required for evolution so the question
therefore is
in yourself and in your observation of
people that you've worked with
did you ever sense that just being hard
driving was kind of
it was great but it was limiting like
did you ever sense that like by liking
the people you work with you could
perform much better
um even if they perhaps were not as hard
to kind of borrow the the common
parlance around this they weren't as
hard as everybody else that because you
like each other so so much that you can
kind of do anything well if you have a
team of
10 people and you all have a great
relationship and you get along well and
you're going against my team and we all
hate each other and we're who's going to
win the team that loves each other is
going to win I would hope it's not even
close it's not as a matter of fact if
you work for me and you don't like me
what kind of performance are you going
to give me it's going to be tough what
if you love me and I've looked out for
you and I've done everything for you and
I've taken care of you what kind of
performance are you gonna give me yeah
everything I'd Die For You So yeah and
you know earlier you want you asked
about
um the human animal and human nature and
this is part of leadership I got asked
this question the other day by uh I was
working with a company and the guy says
you know how do I identify what are the
characteristics of someone that can
execute and how do I identify those
characteristics in a person
so that I can get those people
and I said well
first of all
the characteristics are the
characteristics that everybody's you
know obviously someone that's driven
someone that communicate well someone's
going to make things happen those are
pretty simple to I to know we know what
they are how do you identify them it's
pretty simple as well
I give you a task I give Andrew a task
it's a pretty simple task if you get it
done cool give you a little bit more
complex task
do you get it done yes I give give the
same task to Fred he doesn't get it done
he comes back with a bunch of questions
he slow rolls he's got all kinds of
excuses and problems I give you an even
more complex task you come back you get
it done
and then I'm gonna realize okay Andrew's
the guy that that makes things happen
he's a guy that can actually execute
any a little bit what you said I mean
there's certain breeds of dogs but even
that is it they're not as as as
different as
human beings are right like there and
there are some so so now there are some
guys I've got Andrew who will make
things happen
here's the problem with Andrew when I
say hey Andrew
here's this nebulous idea that I have
can you turn this into a reality and
you're like where do I start uh I'm not
sure where you want me to go meanwhile I
gave it to the guy that didn't make
anything happen with specific tasks that
I gave him and he comes back and says
you know I say hey I got this nebulous
idea can you see what you he goes oh
yeah and all of a sudden he takes it and
he says hey I figured out a way to make
this happen so you might have someone
that's very good at executing but
they're not very creative I might have
somebody that's very creative but
they're not very good at executing so
what do I do I build a team where I've
got Andrew and Fred and they work
together and Fred comes up with good
ideas and we bring him to Andrew and
Andrew goes and executes them so that's
what we're doing from a leadership
perspective is we're letting people's
nature
execute and we're putting people into
roles where their nature is beneficial
I'm not going to take someone that's shy
and introverted and put him out in a
lead sales role I'm not going to take
somebody that's boisterous and
extroverted and put them into a cubicle
where they're going to be looking at
spreadsheets all day clearly I'm not
going to do that so what we have to do
as Leaders is we have to find the right
people for the right role and we place
them into those roles now does it mean
that I abandon all hope that the guy
that's an introvert will ever develop
more communication skills no I'm still
going to work with them and over time
we'll get him a little bit moving in the
right direction but I'm not going to
take somebody that's a a a a a a total
introvert and turn them into a lead
sales guy that's not going to happen any
more than I'm going to change the tiger
stripes so that's what we have to do is
we have to
help people as Leaders we have to help
people find the role and find the thing
that they're good at now
does that mean if I have someone that
loves their job they're going to do
better at it absolutely does it mean
that if I have somebody that's driven
just by achievement that they're going
to be good at their job no in fact well
they can be there's going to be certain
roles I can put them in right if I've
got a sales number I need to hit and and
Andrew's super into achievement he wants
to be the golden child who wants to have
his picture on the on the you know
magazine that we put out about our
industry cool I can throw this task at
you and you're gonna go and get it the
problem is
if there's something that's going to
take more perseverance
and the reward isn't that high or it's a
long-term goal you're probably not the
right guy for the job
so
liking your job is absolutely critical
and if you love your job you're going to
be able to you're going to be able to
most likely excel at it now you could be
an unfortunate person that loves your
job and is not good at it that happens
occasionally right yeah it seems I mean
it's like true rare it reminds me of
your skateboarding career yeah I love
skateboarding but you just weren't that
good at it you know what I loved more
than skateboarding I love the community
I love the community I was in and I Pro
and you know I probably would have gone
to the industry side or worked on a
company side and not been in this actual
skateboard side or just skateboard for
fun so there's a guy in the skateboard
Community his name is Jim thibo and he's
kind of the uh not so hidden secret in
that Community he's an amazing guy and
he's sort of uh early on left
professional skateboarding to run a
company real Deluxe a bunch of other
companies he's an amazing guy and he
told me the we become friends recently
and he said he realized he wasn't going
to be one of the big guys but he knew he
wanted to be in this community so he
found his place and I think everyone in
skateboarding looks to gym as like the
guy who care he's you know he cares
about he truly cares about the sport and
about the people and so he learned to
kind of just wrap his arms and his heart
around the whole thing and it just works
and so I do think
um everyone has a certain place uh in a
community or in a team I think that as
you're describing this I have to imagine
that people are listening and thinking
like wow this team thing is awesome like
it's just amazing I wish I had that
right I'm fortunate to have that in my
podcast I've had that in my lab
certainly in the my podcast team I would
I I always say these guys go I go
like like it's not just it's the people
that press buttons and run equipment
take photos like they go I go like they
go it's over and I'm fine with that I
actually love that because it's it's yes
it's about the podcast but and about the
information and getting it out there but
it's as much about the team and working
together just like it was with
skateboarding so uh hopefully I'm better
at podcasting it was a skateboarding I
kept getting broke off as the
skateboarders say and skateboarding too
often but I want to ask like in your
family life do you look at that as a
team like do you think like this is my
team and they're different and how can
we synergize yeah and you've got to look
at every team like that what are the
strengths and weaknesses of the team and
who's going to be good at what and how
do you put people in positions where
they're going to be able to excel I I
mean what's his name Tebow is that uh
Jim thibo Jim thibo yeah imagine if he
had a mentor that was only the same
listen you got to be a pro skater this
is your only opportunity there's nothing
else and he didn't have the ability to
take a step back and say you know what
man like I I'm not that I'm not going to
be good enough but I really love this
industry
so so luckily for him he figured that
out and you know you talked about the
superpower of being like loving your job
the one thing I claim to be a superpower
is the ability to take a step back and
detach which I guess is going back to
your meditation thing but being able to
take a step back and look at your life
and say man I've been skateboarding
longer than that guy and he's better
than me and I've been skateboarding
longer than that other guy and he's
better than me I
I'm probably not gonna be this probably
not the right job for me what could I do
where I could use my skill set and
obviously he had some entrepreneurial
spirit and was able to figure that out
so being able to be a part of a team and
it goes to what I was saying earlier
about the mob being able to be part of a
team part of the mob part of the Gang
but still have the ability to take a
step back detach from that and assess
what is the best way for this team to
move forward I mean you could have This
brilliant idea that from now on you're
going to make all of your podcasts about
the molecular structure of whatever
and you know the rest of the team
probably need to pull you aside and say
hey man like I know you really care
about that and that's awesome but
everyone really wants to hear about this
other stuff
so let's tie it in together let's expand
what you the specific thing you want to
talk about so being able to take a step
back detach and see the bigger picture
to me is the true superpower of life
of life and it's it's a lot harder than
it sounds and you know this goes back to
when you start talking about people that
are having
going through struggles in life right
and I've described this before as you
know if I'm looking at you
and you're you're in a bad state right
you're depressed you're sad you're
moping around you're not getting
anything done
and I'm looking at you from the outside
and and I'm thinking for me I see this
storm cloud around your head right I see
the storm cloud around your head
and you're in there
and all you see no matter what direction
you look is storm all you see is
Darkness I'm outside and I'm looking I'm
like hey man this guy's got a great
education he's healthy he's got a good
team around him like he's got all these
things going for him but you in that
state you literally cannot see
anything but the darkness of the storm
and that's what's so scary about when
people enter that mode is you can look I
can look at it from the outside and be
like Andrew you just gotta move like
four feet forward and you're gonna be
through this thing and yet you're you
might hear me say that and you go no
Jocko I'm looking ahead there's nothing
but Darkness
so helping people move forward take
action and be able to get that
perspective detach and get outside
themselves get outside their own heads
you know Tim Ferriss said get out of
your head get into your body that's one
way to do it take action go do things
but it's it's very it's very scary and
I'm sure you've had this experience
where you're talking to someone that you
know
and they're bogged down in whatever
problem it is whatever stress they're
under
and you're looking at them going hey man
no it's gonna be okay like you can
clearly see that whatever there whatever
is bothering them and dragging them now
you can clearly see you know a lot of
times it's a relationship right the the
girl or the guy they got they got dumped
and you go hey man that person was a
disaster anyways you're better off
without them and they cannot compute
that they are stuck there or maybe it's
the school that they didn't get into or
the job that they didn't get and they
get so wrapped up in that they can't
they can't get out of that storm and
it's it's so it's such a helpless
feeling
to sit there and tell someone hey
move a little bit towards me and you're
gonna get out of this storm and it's so
much easier said than done
and and that's why trying to engage with
people and trying to give people that
superpower of Detachment where they can
take a step back and say you know what
you're right man that that girl she she
wasn't who I really thought she was I
should move on yes
but
easier said than done and that's one of
the biggest challenges I think that that
we have as friends and in parents and uh
teammates is helping people learn to
detach learn to see the bigger picture
learn to see that the problem that you
have that your whole world
is actually not that big of a deal you
know what I wrote I've written a bunch
of kids books and one of the things that
triggered me to write kids books
is realizing that you know one day my
daughter came home
it's my oldest daughter and she came
home from school and she's like I she
says I'm stupid what do you mean you're
stupid I'm stupid I'm dumb why do you
think that I know whatever grade it is
when you're supposed to know your times
tables I don't know my times tables I
said well oh well how much have you
studied
she kind of gave me the the confused
look what do you mean studied
I said
have you studied yet have you made flash
cards to to learn them
and she didn't she hadn't she thought
she should just know them from you know
the teacher went over what they are now
she should know him like some other kids
in the class did
and and so I'm sitting there going oh
yeah cool we'll just you know we'll make
some flash cards and she made flash
cards and she learned her timetables in
45 minutes and we were good but what
struck me was
to me I was like oh no big deal to her
it was her whole life
and then I got to see that with my other
kids you know somebody said something to
them in The Recess yard and I'm like oh
screw that kid they don't know what
they're don't worry about them but
when you're that's their whole world and
that unfortunately doesn't only apply to
kids it applies to adults as well and
they get this problem in their world
that seems so insurmountable and so
massive because that little ecosystem
that they're stuck in is their world and
they run into this problem and that and
it's disruptive in that world and they
don't know how to get out of it you know
I I did a podcast talking about these
ecosystems that people get into right
and there's all these ecosystems you're
an ecosystem we're we're both in a
shared ecosystem of podcasting and
we could be like oh my gosh you know Lex
just came out with a new podcast and
it's been the biggest success and what
can I do to catch up with Lex
and and all of a sudden I could get
really about you could get really bad we
could be bothered by that and think man
I'm a failure meanwhile there's people
that don't listen to podcasts there's
don't even know what a podcast is and
yet it's our whole world
if we let it be you're in the academic
world hey
you go you you're a professor at
Stanford which is a big deal
in that world I know people that don't
give a rat's ass they couldn't they
don't know where Stanford is I get that
all the time they don't know where
Stanford it's no big deal in the SEAL
Teams same thing somebody has a problem
in the SEAL Teams and they think this is
the whole world and I blew it
and and now what are they gonna do when
you're facing a significant problem in
life
a relationship a problem with a job you
gotta remember that you're in one
ecosystem and if you step outside of
that ecosystem no one really cares and
you could go move into a whole totally
different ecosystem and and find
happiness there but at least utilize
that to get out of that storm cloud that
you're in and you're going to find that
there's plenty of light out there in the
world move towards that and it's going
to be a much better situation
in the spirit of authenticity everything
you're saying hits directly home for me
you know I don't know what people's
perceptions of me are I actually try not
to spend too much time thinking about
that and just really try and stay in
touch with the source and I really do
believe in this notion that our love of
things is what can generate energy and I
try and use action to generate energy
but also I happen to also love exercise
so that's an easy one there for me but I
try and stay in that mode but
um to be quite honest I've spent much of
my adult life and probably too much of
My Teenage life and
20s
you're not quite an adult right in your
20s at least I certainly wasn't in
challenging relationships
that admittedly were challenging because
of my role in them also of course right
and each and every time I remember
thinking moving on from this is like
this insurmountable thing in part
because I'm a caretaker and I cared and
you know it wasn't just about me and a
selfishness it was about wanting to
write all the wrongs of that person's
past like you know I found myself trying
to be a time machine for people I found
myself trying to fix their family lives
I found myself doing all of that and
also ignoring all the things I needed to
focus on in terms of bettering myself
and making sure I was showing up correct
and on and on and um there are data in
the world of in the form of these people
that that know me very very well that I
think would say that and a whole lot
more right
um the point isn't those specific
relationships but each and every time
you know someone would come along and
say like listen if this isn't good for
you it's not good for them or this is a
bad situation or this isn't serving
either of you well but I was like myopic
like this big and not even soda straw
view of the world like Sans spec of the
world and trying to solve because that's
my nature like I want to solve this I
want to solve it I'm going to solve it
and sometimes things were solved for
some period of time and sometimes they
weren't and I think one thing that just
as a confessional like I will say
um
I could really learn the art of
detachment
I could really learn to focus on that
more
if that's the proper language word I
think I'm pretty good at
adapting I think I'm pretty good at
finding good people I'm certainly love
my team and this and that all feels like
natural Synergy although it's hard work
in lab and in the podcast but I think
the
the sort of uh tendency that I have as a
problem solver is to assume that every
problem can be solved and therefore
staying on this problem until it is
solved is the answer and
um maybe the art of Detachment and
getting some perspective would help
because if I look back I certainly don't
regret the experiences that I've had but
I wasted far too much time and frankly I
probably wasted far too much of other
people's time trying to solve problems
that could not be solved and I think
um without going into this in any more
detail
um and of course you're not you can send
me a bill at the End by the way
um I think this is sessions are free man
yeah so I think that being a problem
solver is great being forward Center
Mass is great I think learning the
systems of the brain and body and
Understanding Psychology and and
learning about oneself you know the
Oracle had it right know thyself in ways
that you can maneuver functionally in
your life and career and relationship
Etc great but I think there's also a
downside to being overly fixated because
I my Bulldog Costello used to be like
chewing on something chewing on
something next thing I know he's chewing
on his foot
and you're like hey and you'd have to
like rip him off his own foot and he'd
be like because that chew reflex was
just so strong that sometimes it would
turn on himself that's kind of how how
it feels yeah I wrote a book called
leadership strategy and tactics and one
of the one of the things that I wrote
about in that book is like understanding
what's important and what's not and this
is very very similar to what you're
talking about
looking looking at a problem and taking
a step back and going well a is this
important or not and B is this solvable
or is it not and C what's the ROI on
getting it solved and what's the effort
it's going to take to get this problem
solved and how much is really going to
impact my world and my life if I focus
on it so knowing and understanding when
something is important or not is a very
good skill and again it's a skill that's
directly related to attach Detachment
because when you're in that relationship
it's another thing I've been telling
people lately the the the solution to
your problem is not going to be found in
the problem it's not going to be found
in there you have to get out of the
problem so that you can look at it make
an assessment and you can assess how to
solve the problem or whether you need to
solve the problem or not I mean there's
a lot of things in my life right now
right shrug my shoulders and go okay
just okay oh someone's saying this okay
Roger that like carry on no Factor move
on
and then occasionally you go okay this
is something I need to contend with this
is something I need to deal with this is
something I need to shape or adjust or
move or or solve to use to use your word
the reason I laugh when I say that is
because
I
problems you have to get in there but if
you take a step back you can usually say
oh little adjustment here a little
adjustment there and that thing's going
to sort itself out so Detachment is a
superpower man
certainly is and it's certainly one that
I need to focus on more I'm I'm grateful
for um bringing that up is
does the uh
the biologist in me but you know what is
your process for engaging Detachment or
for disengaging is it an active process
where you go you know I'm going to
detach from this I'm going to put myself
in a situation that is pulling on me
there's this gravitational force and I'm
gonna
I want to create some imagery in my mind
of walking away from it do I physically
walk away from it do I Outsource it to
somebody else what are what are some
tools for detachment yeah this is one of
those situations where you and I had a
discussion about the science and the
practical application aligned
so my original experience with
detachment
was and this is one of those moments
where you know I said a lot of times
things are just small moments over time
and you make a little adjustment this is
one of those moments in my life
and I wrote about leadership strategy
and tactics where
I recognized like in a moment what
Detachment was and how helpful it was
I'm
on an oil rig doing a training Mission
my whole platoon is in a skirmish line
looking at a large area of the oil rig
that we're supposed to be clearing again
it's not combat this is in the 90s
there's nothing going on we're just
doing training
and I'm standing in this Skirmish line
and by the way I'm the youngest and most
Junior guy in my platoon and I'm
standing there looking down the site of
my weapon
and I'm waiting for someone to make a
call and tell us what to do
and I wait for five seconds and I wait
for 10 seconds and I wait for 20 seconds
and no one's saying anything
and we're waiting for a leader in my
platoon to make a call to tell us what
to do tell me what to do
and finally after like 30 seconds which
seems like an eternity
I can't take it anymore and so I take a
step like a like a
a foot a one foot step 12 inches I take
a step off the Skirmish line I look to
my left I look to my right and what I
see is every other guy in my platoon is
staring down their weapon so staring
down the sight of their weapon which
means their field of view is Tiny it's
like a 20 degree field of view you're
looking down the the scope of your
weapon or the side of your weapon and
that's how big their field of view is
and I'm looking and I'm thinking oh
there's my platoon Commander he's
looking down the scope of the side of
his weapon there's my platoon Chief he's
looking down the side of his weapon
there's my leading petty officer he's
looking down the side of his weapon
there's my assistant platoon Commander
he's looking down so everyone in the
platoon is looking down the side of
their weapon which means they all have a
very narrow field of vision
well when I take a step back and look to
my left and look to my right guess what
kind of field of vision I got I got a
massive one I can see the whole scene
and I can see exactly what it is we need
to do
and at that moment
look as a new guy you need to keep your
mouth shut you don't say anything
and I'm thinking well but no one else is
saying anything so I muster up all the
courage I can
and I open my mouth and I say hold left
clear right
which is a basic tactical call no no no
this is not a patent level genius
maneuver it's just a normal call to make
in a situation that we were in I say
hold left clear right
and I'm expecting to get kind of slapped
told shut up new guy but instead
everyone just repeats the call hold left
clear right hold left clear right and
they we execute the maneuver and we
finish the clearance of this oil rig
and we'll get done we get to the the top
of the oil rig which means we cleared
the whole thing we're on the Helo deck
at the top and we go into a debrief and
now I'm expecting okay now I'm gonna get
told hey what were you doing you need to
keep your mouth shut
and instead the platoon Chief goes hey
Jocko good call
on the seller deck down there
and I was kind of like yeah that's
but then I thought to myself hold on a
second why
if I'm the youngest most Junior guy in
this platoon why was I able to see what
we needed to do and make that call why
did that why did that just happen
and then I realized it was because I
took a step back
to use a your term I broadened my field
of view
which allowed me to think more clearly
because instead of being hyper focused
and narrowly focused I broadened my
range of vision I took a breath before I
made my call right I had to take my take
a nice breath to to speak clearly
and I realized that taking a step back
and detaching
I got to see infinitely more than even
the most experienced guys in my platoon
and I started doing it all the time and
I started doing it in land Warfare I
started doing it in urban combat I
started doing it in all these tactical
training scenarios these are just
training this is and I just started
doing these training scenarios and it
always
allowed me to see what we needed to do
and then I started doing it like when I
was having conversations with people and
having a conversation with my platoon
Chief and I can see that he's starting
to turn a little red in the face and you
know we're about to argue about
something I said oh wait a second I'm
taking a step back looking though he's
getting mad right now and he's the
platoon chief
you better just de-escalate this thing
real quick and I'd say hey you know what
chief that sounds good let me go take a
let me go re-look at the plan or
whatever
and so I started to do this
kind of with my normal life was to not
get wrapped up in my own emotions not
get wrapped up in the the gun fight that
was happening right in front of my face
not to get wrapped up in the details of
what was going on but instead take a
step back detach look around
and then you can make a bet much much
better decision and it's not
it's it's exponential you if you're
looking down the sides of your weapon
and you take a step back and you look
around it's exponential how much more
you can see now listen if you are the
only person in a gunfight it's going to
be harder for you to do that because
you've got to be focused on whatever
you're shooting at but when you have 16
guys or 20 guys they're all looking in
the same direction it's very easy to be
the guy that goes I want to take a step
back look around
make a call so when you talk about the
mechanics when I teach this to people
now
the mechanics of it
take a step back literally you're you
know you and I are at a meeting there's
a bunch of people this starts to get
heated argument I will literally push my
chair back away from the table
change my perspective perspective open
widen my field of view
the other the other thing like all in in
the SEAL Teams you don't want to you
don't want to sound panicked on the
radio
for a couple reasons number one because
when you panic on the radio it's going
to cause other people to panic number
two if you panic on the radio and you
sound panicked everyone's gonna make fun
of you so you you know when you get back
from the mission yeah you sounded like a
baby out there so what would I do before
I would key up my radio
take a breath
and so here I'm manually slowing down my
breath I'm broadening my field of view
so if you're in a meeting or you're in a
you know you're at the at the
supermarket parking lot and someone
starts to yell at you
take a step back
take a breath broaden your field of view
detach from those emotions that you're
having and make some space
and that's that's how I go through the
mechanics of Detachment now I can tell
you right now
I mean when when you do this all the
time which I kind of do this all the
time
I don't I don't really have to like step
back but when you're starting to be able
to try and do this absolutely make them
account and I'll tell you here's another
like weird little Nuance thing
lift your chin up
and put your hands down now this isn't
not in a combat situation not not in a
fight but here's the thing when when
when
I get defensive what am I going to do
I'm gonna raise my hands up and put my
chin down that's like a fighting mode so
if you and I are having a discussion and
I'm starting to get heated and I'm
starting to like oh he's not listening
to me instead of me putting my chin down
and and putting my hands like up up to
where I can put them in your face a
little bit no I'm actually gonna take a
step back and say
put my chin up it changes my perspective
a little bit more changes my visual
perspective just by changing the angle
of my head take a step back put my hands
down I'm not being in a defensive mood I
actually want to hear what you have to
say
and if I start listening to what you
have to say and not talking it's very
hard to be detached when you're talking
it's another key component you want to
detach shut your mouth
so I'm in meetings you know I in a bunch
of different companies
I'm running about I have a bunch of
things I own a bunch of different
companies I'm in a meeting in my
companies I'm not the one that's doing
all the Talking in fact I'm doing mostly
listening when I'm in task unit Bruiser
my task unit
I'm not sitting there giving the entire
brief no I'm letting the platoon Chief
and the platoon commanders give those
briefs
and that way I'm detached I'm listening
to what they have to say I'm more
capable of seeing what holes there are
in their plans by not moving my mouth
not talking I'm listening
so those are some of the methodologies
that I use and that I advise people to
use in order to effectively start down
the pathway of being able to detach in
various scenarios
I love it
again I'm saying I love it because I do
love it and thank you I think it's a
wonderful technique we've talked before
on your podcast and uh some of my
listeners maybe not all
um this podcast will be familiar with
the fact that when we narrowly focus our
Gaze on one target
a number of things happen our visual
World becomes constricted of course but
also that we start slicing time more
finely and the dopamine system tends to
start doing a kind of a anticipation and
trying to guide and direct things in
that narrow tunnel of view whereas when
we literally take on panoramic Vision
it's not necessarily moving our head
around although one could but broadening
our field of view or looking at a
horizon especially if we're walking but
getting that kind of not kind of getting
a broader field of view we slice time
differently things don't feel as
imposing on us
um this is the the physiological
substrate underlying what you're
describing and I think it's
um it goes a step further because
in that open
larger aperture of visual understanding
there's an open larger window of
cognitive understanding and new options
start to surface right I mean I think
this is I've long been fascinated by the
fact that this actually I'll tell us a
real quick story in 2015 I was
um I went over to Spain to do some
mountaineering with Wim Hof okay this
wasn't because I wanted a podcast I
didn't have any social media I just went
over there because I heard this guy whim
contacted him somehow arranged a trip
for myself and I went over there and we
did some crazy dangerous mountaineering
that I had no business doing
almost ripped my left leg off in a stunt
that was organized by others there that
I never should have done in any case
one day look and whim is like crouched
on the ground next to like a curb in
this parking lot before a hike he's down
on the ground with a little stick
and I was like what are you doing he's
like look and there were ants climbing
up this thing and he's like
they're mountaineering this curb
and I thought this guy's different right
but then I realized we were about to do
the same thing up this big face and I
thought wow like he's able to think of
these different scales and see
similarities I thought that's pretty
cool I would have never stopped to look
there and I'll I still remember it right
and was it profound no was it
interesting yeah in the sense that
things are happening at all scales all
the time and we we think we know the
scale to pay attention to and we think
that that's the one that matters most
and I think it's fair to say that in a
gunfight like there is a scale that
matters most but new options New
Perspectives actually come from that
broader field of view which is what
you're describing and later that day
it's interesting because this group
going up some of them were really
challenged in the in the The Climb
and
when went back to this example of how
the ants would stack on top of one
another and he used an analogy from that
to help people through this climb and
there's a beautiful pool at the top et
cetera et cetera anyway I think that
these examples
um are in fact meaningful especially the
ones that you gave because they don't
just relate to military I mean you can
imagine around the dinner table I've had
this you know kids are there and
partners there and sometimes it's really
nice to sit back and just kind of hear
it all and bask in it all but oftentimes
like new information will surface like
you said you know like all I'm hearing
is worries out of this person or they're
not even really here they're all talking
about what we're gonna do next next time
next time next time and again like you
can re-anchor people like hey like maybe
let's focus on what what we're doing
here or sometimes people are hyper
focused on what's happening there and
they need to think about something in
the future I love this I need to
practice Detachment in a number of
different domains in my life
um one thing that I I'm realizing after
hearing you describe the process that I
really need to do is I need to start
taking
um some time away from my work
maybe even a little bit of time parallel
to relationship to sort of get better
perspective on it because I think the
problem-solving nature in us really
makes us myopic really makes us
nearsighted yeah that's
um you see this a lot I mean I I get to
see this a lot we do events with
companies businesses and we go off-site
somewhere where
they're detached they're just they're de
facto detached from their day-to-day
business you pull someone out of their
business for two days and all of a
sudden they start seeing the solutions
what they they never see them like it's
a lot harder for them to see them when
they're in the fire fight you get them
out of the firefight it's hard for them
to see it when they're in that
acquisition that they're doing how are
we going to merge these two cultures
this is going to be impossible boom pull
them out all right let's talk about two
cultures and and let's talk about what
possible outcomes are and all of a
sudden when you get them to take a step
back the these Solutions will appear and
and it is true in a gunfight now listen
if it's a one-on-one gunfight even then
the ability to take a step back
and look around or use your peripheral
vision you have to be able to do this
it's going to increase its exponential
how much eating that's why it's like a
superpower it's like cheating it's it's
like cheating you know I was speaking of
Seth Stone Seth Stone took over
uh he became a task unit Commander a
troop Commander when we got back from
ramadi and so now he's the guy in charge
and now I was running the training and a
couple months into his training he broke
his neck
um
broke his vertebrae in his neck his
spinal cord was okay so he was you know
the guy with the big neck brace on and
he couldn't do any arduous training and
his his seal task unit which is two
platoons was going through their land
Warfare training
and he couldn't do it he couldn't carry
a rucksack couldn't carry a machine gun
so he couldn't do it so I said hey I'm
coming out let's go out and you can
observe your guys and see how they're
doing
and so there we are we're out in the
desert his his troop is going through
field training exercise or full mission
profile so it's like a big fake
operation there's a fake Target there's
fake bad guys we're using these laser
these high-speed laser guns to shoot
and we're we're kind of standing on this
little berm
and at a certain point in the operation
his whole task unit like 40 guys gets
pinned down in this little Ravine and so
we're kind of standing in the Ravine
with these guys and no one's making any
decisions and the enemy with these laser
guns are starting to maneuver and
starting to they're killing guys because
these laser guns you can die
and Seth like hits me on the arm he's
like can I can I tell him what to do and
I was like no look let him figure it out
so another 30 seconds pass another guy
gets killed with laser he hits me again
bro let me let me say something to him
and I was like No let him figure it out
another minute goes by two more guys are
now dead just laser dead but they're
dead
and he hits me again and he's like bro
let me tell him and I go
all right go ahead and tell him and so
he just crouches down next to one of the
guys and bangs him on the shoulder could
peel right
and which is a again it's just a
fundamental basic call and the guy
shouts it out be all right and they
start peeling right in another minute
later they're all out of the Kill Zone
and everything's okay
and then
Seth looks at me and he goes man this is
so easy way up here
and I said bro
look at where we are we are in the
Ravine with the guys
we're now we're on a knee and the guys
are laying down but it's not this we
weren't on some elevated position
and I said hey it's not that we're in an
elevated position it's just that we're
detached and looking around
and he goes oh my God and I said hey you
remember when you and I went through
this training and he goes yeah and I go
this is what it was like for me all the
time I was constantly just looking
around so that's why it seems like a
magic power right it's like a superpower
because you know Seth's down there with
his gun and he's shooting and I'm like
hey bro move your guys over to that go
to that Ridgeline right there set
security boom and he how did how did
Jocko see that
Jocko must be a tactical genius no I'm
not a tactical genius I'm just taking a
step back and looking around and this
and like you just said it applies to
everything that we do if you're having a
conversation with your significant other
and you start to see that they're
getting frustrated about something now
look if you're in the conversation a
hundred percent you're gonna get
frustrated too you're going to get
frustrated they're frustrated next thing
you know you've gotta you've got an
emotional argument going on whereas if
you take and take a mental step back and
say wait why are they frustrated right
now
oh because I'm
trying to solve their problem when
really what they're looking to do is
vent okay got it let them vent okay cool
oh that sounds horrible you know what do
you think you're going to do instead of
saying well if that's the problem here's
what you should do because
people aren't always looking for that so
yeah this this thing this ability is and
it's something that can absolutely be
trained and that's what's cool about it
can absolutely be trained it's not a
natural gift it's it's some people will
be better at it than others but it's
something that you can train and I used
to see guys develop and I see people
develop it now in the business world
where they'll they'll report back to me
you know oh we had a meeting with the
union today and the union started
escalating what they wanted to do and I
just took I I detached and we ended up
de-escalating and now we got a solution
so this is an absolute skill set that
can that can be learned and that's what
that's what makes it
especially nice
because there's some people look if
you're very articulate
born very some people are born more
articulate than other people some people
are born with an ability to simplify
things more than others and you can
train you know you can become more
articulate you can become you can learn
to simplify things more
and some people are going to be
naturally good at detaching but but
everyone can get better at it and that's
a beautiful thing
is a beautiful thing and I'm highly
incentivized to do this I mean there are
areas of my life that are going really
well that I also want to apply it there
I think that I've tended to rely on
people close to me as a way to access
this Detachment
um I will be very direct in saying that
you know I am not the leader of my
podcast there is a leader it is not me
I'm part of the team but it is not me
and I often rely on his input
um and sometimes that input is solicited
and sometimes it's not one place for
instance where you see people getting
really myopic is on social media right
um and you know and I've experienced
this
um you know I'd love to say that I'm
always non-reactive and I think in
general I take the stance that I have
filters so I have Pro I have filters I I
know why I'm there right I'm interested
in being a teacher and a giver and
informing people and about the beauty
and utility of biology that's why I say
it's not a mission statement it's a fact
that's what I care about anything that
doesn't fit through that filter don't
really have any business doing but
occasionally I like to you know make a
joke or something but occasionally
something comes through and you and I
find myself I mean wait a second and you
get
sucked into that tunnel and sometimes
it's observing other people in tunnels
and when you're not in the tunnel it's
so obvious what's happening right you're
watching in some cases people just
dragging their lives in some cases
syncing their entire careers I mean the
former chair of Psychiatry at Columbia
University in New York made an
absolutely foolish
truly insensitive totally inappropriate
tweet
that's my opinion and I think it was the
opinion of all the people that fired him
from his job this person was at the Apex
of his career lost his job
for saying something terrible and in
retrospect was like said something like
I don't know what I was thinking you
know and so this guy's a psychiatrist so
his he he lives in the in the study in
the treatment of the mind which just
goes to show that everyone I think is
susceptible to being pulled into these
tunnels
and fortunately everyone is susceptible
to learning to teach themselves how to
ratchet themselves out of it so I love
this idea of a teachable skill I'm
certainly going to practice it in
one-on-one and in group situations and
and in a variety of situations I I think
that the tunnel is has a gravitational
pull there's like an Allure to that
tunnel and I always just go right back
to the neurochemistry I think that
there's something about solving a
problem inside of a tunnel like an
animal on a chase
you know but at some point you know that
animal could get picked off by a you
know a run over by a truck because it
was didn't have enough situational
awareness I'm definitely going to
practice this through opening the Gaze
you know and and broadening gaze and I
think I also do for a couple days off
from things to just walk and think about
work on these Retreats do people work on
work are they just there to do other
things and that's where the ideas
surface we'll do a little bit of both so
we'll do some stuff that is focused on
work but then we'll pull out and do
things that are completely unrelated to
work to for that very reason whether we
do something physical whether we do
something some kind of a mental exercise
but we do things that are completely
unrelated to their work and and take
those breaks in order for them to free
their mind
and you know what bothers you about
social media this is
when you say like there's some things
that kind of like make you mad I mean
not me but you know could be you know of
course of course like I'm a human you
know little things little things
creeping it's not the things that are
obvious it's actually not direct
critique of me it's um it's when people
exploit misunderstandings to try and
create a greater misunderstanding that
doesn't exist that's what gets me
because to a scientist that's like the
most irritating thing I don't know what
the analogy would be in in the SEAL
Teams but it's like someone like
hijacking something that like they
didn't mean that but then they kind of
they they distort the argument the word
gaslighting gets thrown around a lot now
a lot of people actually think that
anytime someone States a boundary like
no I don't believe that's that that's
gasoline trust me the psychiatrists who
are all professionally trained tell me
that is not gaslighting gaslighting is a
very particular thing where you're um
trying to alter someone's reality in a
very active almost like sociopathic way
um so I just want that's a little
editorializing right there what bothers
me is when people
um hijack
um
you know sometimes someone in a in an
argument isn't as sophisticated with
their language to somebody else so
someone will hijack that lack of
sophistication and try and flip them on
their back that sort of thing really
gets under my skin because I feel that
creates um unnecessary divide
um there are a few other things but you
know I I always joke in my lab and I'll
say every night you know I have three
thousand pet peeves but I also have like
3 000 flaws to match each one of those
pet peeves so yeah I whenever I'm in
this is not just social media but it's
just life you know when somebody says
something
about me or to me that I don't like what
I realized years ago is like the reason
I don't like it is because there's some
truth in what they're saying and the
best thing to do is to say either to
yourself if you're by yourself or to
them is to say yeah yeah
you're right I I am kind of a
knucklehead sometimes or yeah you're
right I sometimes do jump to conclusions
or yeah yeah you're right I was
completely wrong about that
and that is just
so much more Liberty liberating and
healthy
than saying you don't know what you're
talking about or no I don't just going
into that defensive mode and and trying
to close your mind instead of opening
your mind up to listen to what somebody
else has to say and say yeah that's a
good point I'm you're spot on with that
one
next question next comment let's go one
thing I appreciate about you on social
media is that the um limited number of
words in each of your responses that's a
it's a great thing and forcing you to be
efficient and concise actually is a huge
Advantage it also forces you to be
um precise at least about category right
I think there's there's something to be
said for that well there's a good
example so I was on social on Twitter
the other day since Twitter's
getting getting kind of getting a lot of
getting a lot of uh traction right now
there's a lot of Mayhem going on the
other gun fight and somebody asked me
somebody said hey I'm going to boot camp
soon what advice do you have for me and
I wrote back enjoy boom and like you
said I mean it's Twitter I'm responding
to a bunch of people
and then somebody else chimed in and
said
you know might as well not even answer
Jocko that's not helping this guy at all
and look look at your face for those of
you that are watching your face just got
a little bit mad right you got a little
bit defensive for me yeah well that I
think that's my nature I don't like
seeing other people sort of attacked I
think that's just my nature I had a
split sacking of who the hell is this
guy and then I said you know what he's
right
and then I
tweeted again back like I said sorry man
you're right what I should have said was
hey
read the book leadership strategy and
tactics and it's a good book for someone
that is going to be in an environment
that's going to be challenging and we're
going to be faced with leadership
challenges and enjoy boot camp because
if your mindset is this is sucks and
this is terrible
you're it's going to be terrible and
it's going to suck and if you go with a
mindset of hey this is a cool experience
and I should enjoy it
you're going to have a much better time
that's my full answer I'm sorry I didn't
give you and it's perfectly fine like
that guy was right to critique me and he
was right in saying that and there was a
bunch of what's funny is a bunch of
other people came to my defenses like
this guy that's really great and so so
but my point is instead of me getting
defensive and crazy and letting it drive
me crazy opened my mind a little bit
listen to what they have to say accept
that there's got to be some level of
Truth in it and there was I gave a guy a
very very terse response and I could
have expanded on it more and I did no
big deal
good times tonight a few minutes ago I
was thinking to myself I wonder where
your mind is at like in the few moments
before you fall asleep like are you able
to make yourself go mind blank
um pretty easily it's something I've
been practicing more because I tend to
again ruin I like to drill into problems
obviously yesterday I did a solo episode
which when we do those that are usually
anywhere from five to twenty hours of
prep and then the recordings I won't say
how long they take but
um but I love going into the tunnel
right the tunnel is like the that's
where the juice is for me and finding
the structure and I have the benefit of
amazing producer helps me sort through
it and when I kind of like came out of
this thing and then went home couldn't
eat because I was just like I don't want
dinner and then I was explaining a call
I had with a colleague the other day and
you know my my partner she my girlfriend
she was just like you know like okay
like I'm going to sleep and I was like
up and like thinking of texting and like
thinking writing notes out and I thought
oh man I'm like Costello like chewing on
the stick and like they chewing into my
pot I need I need sleep I need to go to
sleep so I think I have a bit of a
harder time disengaging really
um and um this is why I never touched
cocaine or amphetamine because I think
that some of us have a a love of the
dopamine circuitry that I always sensed
if I were to have tried drugs like that
that they might have been the um
the thing that would like hit my neural
circuits just right you know some people
talk about alcohol that way I've read
books by alcoholics like the book dry
and a few other um Rich Roll talks about
this that he drank alcohol for the first
time in college it was like this Elixir
that filled his body that made him feel
right for the first time like that's not
how I feel after a couple of drinks I
feel a little relaxed but I could do
without it but this drilling into
something is really that's my um I guess
maybe that's my I don't think it's the
superpower but I have some some strength
there but I think it's also the thing
that cut that can cut on the other side
yeah when you started off this
conversation early you talked about you
know getting up in the morning and do
you just get up and you have these and I
was about to go down the path of like
it's
at night time when I'm trying to go to
sleep and I have some random thought
about something that that can be a hard
for I have a a visual thing that's going
on it seems like I'm on a roller coaster
and I'm going in like a new idea comes
and I'm just like on this awesome ride
and I it's not gonna stop and I can't I
don't know how to stop that
um oh no I mean I think it it goes with
people who are very driven and and like
to master different crafts I have a
colleague his name is Carl diceroth he's
a bioengineer he has five children and
he's a
psychiatrist is like an incredible like
one of these people that does a ton very
likely will win the Nobel Prize I mean
he's an amazing scientist amazing guy
and he does this practice that he does
which is not a meditation which he sits
for an hour late at night after his kids
have gone to sleep and he forces himself
forces himself to think in complete
sentences with punctuation about some
problem I tried doing that for about
five minutes and I fell off but it's
something that he's cultivated in
himself which helps him in his career
right I don't think this is certainly
not something I recommend if I did that
at one or two in the morning
I think that would be bad for my sleep
because falling asleep actually requires
drifting into these kind of liminal
States so one of the reasons why I'm a
big proponent of things like non-sleep
deep rest or these Yoga Nidra practices
which are basically body scans where
you're trying to learn to detach from
the sensory World
um and they're very effective it
certainly for me they've been very
effective at teaching me to kind of turn
off thinking which is an interesting
notion in its own right but I like the
idea of of Detachment by stepping back
and getting perspective my my father is
much better at that he's a very calm guy
in in the world of Confrontation I
always knew it when I was a kid because
he would blink which meant like
something was going to happen like I was
gonna get it and um now but I've always
noticed he can control his his responses
as his behavior
um others of us in the family you know
the side from New Jersey we're more like
go to loggerheads so I don't know this
raises a question and I think it's um
one that
I and several other people I talk to in
anticipation of this podcast we're
asking you know I think one reason why
people are drawn to people who have been
in the SEAL Teams
um and you in particular are that I
think everybody not just males but
females too I think everybody wants to
know
like their calibration point on their
level of toughness
I think people wonder you know I think
when people talk about Buds and all that
I think a lot of people wonder would I
make it through right I've certainly
wondered it I haven't spent hours on it
I went my path I'm happy for the path I
went
um but I think people wonder like do I
have this thing that supposedly buds
selects for and if I don't like how
tough am I or not tough am I I think
that we all can look at other people's
physically and I'm not somebody that
does a lot of this I know some people
are really obsessed by this like oh that
person has like an eight pack with like
veins on there like I don't understand
that that's not me but I understand some
people do that even to the point of
pathology
but I think most people wonder like how
resilient am I how and they can look to
experiences that they've survived and
say I made it through or I'm resilient
or not but is there a way that like we
can certainly that we can train it by
doing hard things cold showers this kind
of thing or like small examples of those
but
do you think it's even an important
question to ask
and if it is you know how does one go
about thinking like where where like how
resilient am I should we put ourselves
into situations of discomfort just to
test that because I will say I think a
lot of people look to SEAL Teams and
Team guys in particular as kind of a a
calibration point of like okay they know
how to do hard things they were selected
for the ability to carry logs and get
into cold water over and over and roll
in the sand and go without sleep for a
week or so like but that's probably not
what they were doing when they were on
deployment it's clearly a pressure test
for something else
yeah it's a strange strange thing the
basic underwater demolition SEAL
training and
quite frankly going and getting wet and
cold and being miserable
is is actually nothing
um compared to
like being on deployment and a good
example that I use to compare this to is
when I was on deployment in 2006 in
ramadi
there was uh as you were as you were
driving off base to go to the city to go
into the City and conduct operations as
you drove out of the compound on your
right was this area that was called the
vehicle graveyard
and the vehicle graveyard was exactly
what it sounds like it was probably 75
or a hundred
vehicles that were blown up destroyed
burned
um in various
Twisted conditions that had been dragged
back through the city and put into this
vehicle graveyard and as you drove by
that vehicle graveyard you know without
question that every one of those
Twisted Vehicles represented
one two three four five American
casualties wounded horribly wounded
killed
and there you are
in a vehicle about to roll out into that
City
where what you're looking at can easily
be you in the next three minutes
and you're going to do that today you're
going to do that tomorrow you do that
the next day and the day after that and
the day after that
that
compared to and by the way this isn't
just seals that are doing that this is
Marines this is the army guys that are
over there this is what everyone is
doing
and they do it
they do it
um you know I talk about Markley who's
one of my guys the first seal killed in
Iraq and
he was the lead turret Gunner
in the lead Humvee
and
like in Vietnam if you were the point
man in Vietnam if you want to like an
infantry Patrol you had a point man in
Vietnam you were at risk booby traps
Ambush so they rotated you out like you
didn't have to stay up there all all the
time you do an hour up with the that's
Point man they get someone else up there
and that guy the lead turret Gunner
in the in a Humvee column of four or
five or six Vehicles if you hit an IED
that's the vehicle that's going to hit
it right
if you go into an ambush that's the guy
that's going to get hits the guy that's
standing up in a 50 caliber turret
that's the guy that's gonna die
and
mark
was you know he was a new guy so he's
he's in that lead turret 50 cal
and
he never asked to get rotated out
and I remember he's a very like to say
very he was extremely charismatic
funny gregarious uh
comedian
and you know we got all kinds of stories
about Mark but one of them you know we
were in Vegas and we're all gambling and
like I come down
from my hotel room and like I see Mark
across the across the he's playing
Blackjack you know he sees me he goes
hey sir when are the new Cadillacs
coming out like he's just lighting up
everybody
um just having a fantastic time but I
remember one night you know he's getting
ready to roll out and
if I wasn't going out with the platoons
I'd like go out you know like see the
guys off get my hand salute as they're
leaving and I'm like how you feeling
tomorrow how you doing Mark you're good
to go and he's like feeling lucky sir
you know like that was his attitude
and he's a guy that's going to drive by
that vehicle graveyard
drive right out on that City and he's
gonna do it the next day and the day
after that and the day after that so
and and like I said that's what the army
guys are doing that's what the Marine
Corps guys are doing they're doing it
and so as much as the mythology around
basic SEAL training goes
um
to me that's that that experience in
combat and what guys do is infinitely
harder
and infinitely more important
um
now all that being said basic SEAL
training is is the is a very strange
laboratory for human beings it is a very
strange laboratory for human beings and
it's a
it's
it's kind of crazy the way it works it's
very it's it's obviously extremely
difficult but there's no like you I
wouldn't put money
you could put odds on somebody making it
through you know like hey that guy seems
like he's gonna be good to go but I
wouldn't put a bunch of money on it
right and I wouldn't take like a hundred
percent I would never take 100 bet on
anybody
because there's no one that's 100 gonna
make it through that training and
there's there's just random you know
some people say it's well it's because
of your why there's people that make it
through SEAL training because their
ex-girlfriend said they couldn't make it
there's some other guy that makes it
through because they promised God that
they would make it there's some other
guy that made it through because you
know their dad said they could have
there's like every one of these examples
you can come up with and and it's good
enough for some random dude to make it
through and it doesn't matter what your
pedigree is doesn't matter where you're
from there's guys from Iowa there's guys
from Florida there's guys from wherever
that make it and there's guys from Iowa
and there's guys from Florida and
there's guys from wherever that don't
make it guys from farms guys from silver
spoon in their mouth and it you just
can't predict it and I I mean it has to
have something to do with the fact that
how bad you actually want to do it
that's it's it's a strange thing and I
wouldn't you know I wouldn't try and
you know if I was in the world if I
didn't do that training I wouldn't be
trying to figure out if I could make it
or not because you don't know
you don't know
it's a very strange thing
and it's and it's so uh
mythical almost right now right it's
mythical that how hard it is
and this is not too many people make it
through man 15 Yeah Yeah Yeah Yeah from
all the folks that I've talked to are
there or gone through been instructors
there some we both know
um seemed that that 15 number is
unlikely to change as long as they keep
the the process the same it just seems
about 15 people seem to have something
in them that can perhaps grow during
that training but that this it is being
identified and selected for rather than
somehow being built up across at least
that phase of the early phases of
training and then at some point they
build on that capacity and you know this
gets to this really somewhat
controversial issue frankly like are
people wired differently
and listen
I started off in neural development and
I'll tell you that there are some
Universal properties of neural
development in all surviving humans like
that you're going to breathe without
having to think about it your heart's
going to be without having to think
about it but beyond that there's a lot
of variation in natural levels of
dopamine and serotonin
um
there's nature plays a powerful role and
nurture and what's interesting though is
we can't always predict from parents
what nature is going to do recently we
had someone on the podcast I'm excited
for you to listen to it if uh perhaps
you will if I send it to you is a guy
who talks about inheritable acquired
traits you don't expect that because you
work out that your grandkids will be
more muscular and have better endurance
but there's actually some evidence that
that may be the case and you go well how
could that be we got two kinds of cells
in your body it turns out you have what
are called somatic cells which are
ultimately of The Germ cells which are
your sperm and your wife's eggs
well why wouldn't the DNA of the sperm
cells in the egg cells be modifiable by
experience if all the other cells are
and it turns out there's some evidence
that maybe it's not the DNA but the RNA
are think about that that means that
whether and we've known this that people
that have been in a famine several
Generations later their implications for
blood sugar regulation and they're great
grandkids so the idea that experience
and acquired traits can change us is
actually has some validity and uh you
know and it and this gets into really
complicated things because people oh
this is like the giraffe that had to
like crane its neck and then give birth
to longer and extra halves and it's like
well not exactly but also not entirely
untrue either so I love the idea that
there are inherited traits and that
there are that nature and nurture play a
role but that hard work may actually
transmit across Generations yeah there's
in Seal training you know you have kids
that come through that they call
legacies which means that they have a
dad I think a dad brother whatever
and they do have a better chance of
making it but it's not a guaranteed
chance at all
and you know my personal opinion is like
I think a legacy kid would have a better
chance of making it just due to the
Thanksgiving dinner that you're gonna
have to go through for the rest of your
life with your family if you don't yeah
if you're even invited which you might
be on your own uh but yeah that's so
there's maybe there's something to that
as well but I think that's just more
the the pressure that someone must feel
like hey there's no way I'm gonna be
allowed back in my home if I don't make
it through this training so I'm gonna
have to just go ahead and suck it up but
not everyone makes it and um it's it's a
bummer and when that when that does
occur
well for people who are not thinking
about going through SEAL training or who
missed the opportunity or who are not
interested in that for whatever reason
do you think there's value to doing
things each day that suck a little bit
or from time to time doing something
that's you know puts one into a state of
deliberate uh discomfort 100 yeah I mean
100 I mean even in order to improve
yourself you gotta you gotta
impose some discipline on yourself right
if if you want to get stronger you've
got to do things that require strength
if you want to be tougher you got to do
things that require you to be tougher I
think that's pretty straightforward does
that mean doing things that are not
pleasurable so for instance
um
you know I've done some long podcasts
and uh a few weeks ago I did a series we
were doing a series with Andy Galpin all
about exercise and exercise science and
we did six podcasts in that week the
most I've ever done which you may doing
four or five the next week not so bad
but I loved every second of it and I
love every second of podcasting and so
it didn't suck but it built up a greater
capacity I guess I'm asking specifically
about things that really feel like a
splinter
is there any value to that
um because I I have to say there are
some people I know some of them are
former team our team guys I guess you
don't say former team guys they were
um out there out of the teams now but
they're Team guys forever who seem to
not be rattled by little things those
guys in particular they they don't seem
to be rattled by little things and then
I know people that you know they um they
get the wrong size coffee at a coffee
shop and they dissolve into a puddle of
tears right so there does seem to be
something to this whole like mental
resilience thing and flexibility thing
um and I I try and do something that's
uncomfortable
um to me about once a week something I
really don't like
um
it doesn't matter what that is but I try
and do something that's kind of like
unpleasant
um or do something in a way that's
unpleasant I guess the example would be
getting into the cold water the first
thing in the morning and making that
decision from under the blankets
is a rough one for me
um but then it gets easier and then you
wonder is it still serving the purpose
that it's building me up so should
people seek truly like bad experiences
provided that they're done in a safe way
yeah yeah I
I think that you're gonna just like you
would develop your legs by doing squats
and you would develop your back by doing
pull-ups I think you would develop your
resiliency by doing repetitions of
things that require you to be tougher
that actually suck okay good so and the
reason I ask this is because I think a
lot of people think well I work out
every day but I but then you probe them
a little bit they're like but I love
exercise and then well then that doesn't
quite qualify as something that makes
you tougher right or they think oh the
last reps of a set are really tough but
if you love hitting failure on a set
because that's kind of what I seek in
the gym I love that aspect of the
training that's actually where I know
I'm getting better it no longer serves
as resilience training it more just
serves as training
um in any case I think that the point is
clear and I appreciate your answer
I have to ask about something this is
going to seem like a total Divergence
but it's not which is animals
because first of all they're a love of
mine in terms of understanding the
animal kingdom and placing humans into
the animal kingdom second of all I know
you're a hunter
um and also I know you own dogs and the
question I have is do you ever look at
people or did you ever work in teams of
of guys when you were on active duty you
kind of see that the difference is you
know you mentioned before this person's
really good at problem solving this
person's a little bit more
um creative
do you ever wonder whether or not people
have embody different kind of animal
archetypes
because I do well that that thing where
people say that dogs or owners look like
their dogs dogs look like their owners I
think that's I've seen all kinds of
things you can go on the internet and
find a bunch of examples of dogs that
look like their owners and owners that
look like their dogs so I think that's
true and I think uh you know my dog is
awesome and don't tell me about your dog
what kind of dog is it my dog is a
German Shepherd his name is Odin and
he's an awesome dog you know like
um and he's got a personality but he's
got an interesting personality so like
she
doesn't like to uh
like cuddle right like my kids will be
like oh he doesn't like to cuddle no
even you know when we go to bed at night
he goes to you know four feet away from
the foot of my bed
even if I was like Hey jump up here I've
told him jump up in here you know we
want to pet you he'll jump up in there
and he just like kind of goes in that
low Crouch position
and then sort of Waits until I say free
dog and then he goes back down he goes
four feet away from the foot of the bed
and sits there because he's that's his
that's his personality is to protect and
set security and do his job and and
that's what he's like and so you know
you've got other dogs that are you know
they they they're not gonna they're at a
totally different mindset
so yeah dogs have definite personalities
and and look I also have uh it's not all
genetic so
two of my friends
um got dogs that were brothers
what are they called Dogo Argentinos
yeah those are hard to get in the U.S
they're not
um they might not even be legal in the
United States so don't tell me who these
people are not that I care but I'm gonna
tell you what they are yeah but these
two guys and those two guys had
different personalities well one guy is
a very happy-go-lucky likes to smoke pot
likes to hang out very
just a chill kind of playful guy the
other guy's not he's the opposite in
every category
so
and they both got these dogs
and you fast forward fast forward like a
year
the dog that was owned by the playful
guy his dog was just a big puppy looking
at you know just wagging the tail the
other dog you had to keep it in a cage
or it would murder everything in sight
and these dogs were brothers from the
same litter and they were completely
opposite and so I think it has more a
lot more to do with
with nurture than it does to do with
nature but that being said you know when
you look at
when you look at mouths I mean Mal's
have a personality that is very distinct
compared to a German Shepherd now look
there's outlying mouths there's outlying
German Shepherds there's outlying you
know you name whatever kind of golden
retriever or whatever dog is known for
being more playful like you you get
around the mouth mouths are Mal's are
mouths and they're that way if you've
been around miles before oh uh the
Belgium yeah a few of them my neighbor
has one and that thing
um is not terribly friendly but it's
it's a security dog so I don't expect it
to be because it's um yeah they're
they're I know that they use them for
work in the teams and I've heard that
you have to keep a close eye on your
relationship with them because if you
get lacks about it they'll bite you is
that true the first time I saw one uh
we were doing like a drill with using
dogs for the first time and one of the
team guy Dog Handlers came out and so we
hit this target building and you know
the they kind of pre-briefed us like hey
you get this target building and this
guy's gonna be a runner a squirter
and and so the we pull up in the Humvees
assault team jumps out I'm kind of
staying external I kind of kind of want
to see what's going to happen so the
squirter goes running off
and the dog handler like
whatever tracks his dog on this guy and
then releases it gives him whatever
commands you know or whatever the
commands are that thing is like totally
primed like and unlike anything you've
ever seen in your life it is just Prime
it's tracking that guy he hits that
release on that leash and that thing
takes off at a thousand miles an hour it
jumps like I'm not kidding 15 feet maybe
10 feet in the air away and just
Chomps onto this dude the dude goes down
it was freaking awesome I've seen some
videos of those um Malinois I guess I
didn't for forgiving because before I
didn't know you're referring to but
Mal's Belgium Malinois those dogs like
running up trees jumping over little
little Rivers yeah it's crazy incredibly
powerful animals yeah well the idea that
people you know that they mimic their
owners has me a little concerned because
my last dog I had to put him down was my
Bulldog Costello he's a bulldog dog
Mastiff I got him because I went to
pick out a puppy basically and there
were eight of these Bulldogs all of them
were running around and then there's one
in the background just eating out of all
of their bowls and I was like I want
that one you know big Bulldog biggest
one in the litter laziest
creature not just dog but laziest
creature that ever existed but if you
need to activate he would he was just
very efficient with his energy and you
know I don't think I have a bulldog
personality and that's why I got him to
kind of balance me out you know
um never retrieved never did anything uh
stole and destroyed every toy every dog
park in San Diego who's kind of famous
there you know I had to bring five
dollar bills to pay people for all the
balls and things he would destroy so
anyway my apologies to all the dog
owners not really I I miss them did you
train your dog or did someone else in
the house I did and was he trained to be
a security dog or a kind of family dog
or it's kind of a mixture yeah I mean
the true working dogs
um unless you unless you
have the time and effort to put into
them or you buy them that way uh
you you don't like you don't want one of
those dogs that I was just describing in
your house they're they're not for a
house
um unless there's like there's that
level my dog's not that level uh he's
awesome
did you apply some of the same um
principles that you use in uh leadership
of humans with your dog yeah there are a
lot of similar principles but there's
also you know there's there's some
differences there's like
they're pack animals right and they
respond to you know the the pack leader
it is funny you know my my dog obeys me
as if it's the command of God and my
wife he's kind of like maybe I'll do
what you say so they pick up on that
kind of stuff dogs are very intuitive I
love this idea that I was told early on
that they can feel your emotions I think
they actually can sense how we feel not
just by the intonation of our voice but
I hope someday someone will figure out
in a non-invasive way because I don't
like the idea of people doing
experiments on dogs in an invasive way
kind of like what they're picking up on
like for instance we know that sharks
are paying attention to the amount of
activity in the lateral line of fish a
lot fish have these um these stretches
of neurons they call the lateral line
that allows them to school and know the
distance to different things and be able
to steer around Coral they feel
proximity it'd be kind of like if you're
turning a coin you go and they can even
recognize specific lateral line
um signatures so be like you and Mark
Lee walking together through the dark
but maybe people sift around but you're
like you don't have to look at them
that's Mark you kind of learn him into
like a fish can do that sharks can
sense whether or not the lateral line is
is
um let's say vibrating but firing at a
particular frequency to know oh that
fish is like a little bit slower than
the rest I mean they're you know hunting
animals just they develop these
incredible senses and
um I think humans have some of these
kind of senses and more rudimentary ways
we're just not forced to use them unless
of course you know you are become a
hunter of animals or a hunter of humans
and you tap into these neural circuits
that are very primitive and hardwired in
everybody but of course they're honed in
in um in Warriors
um where I could spiral off into animal
biology in ways that truly would take us
26 hours I don't want to do that
um
I'm almost hesitant to ask this question
but um I'm gonna do it anyway
many times online you are asked whether
or not you will run for office and I
want to say that I think it's a
true compliment I don't think people are
asking just to kind of entertain
themselves I think that
um this country certainly and a lot of
the world is desperate for certain kinds
of leaders and people that have
experience in high risk High consequence
chaotic situations and have shown
prowess at leadership in multiple
domains and um you are certainly one of
those individuals
and so they ask for that reason among
others and I've heard you give your
answer you can repeat it again here but
as a more broad theme that I think
people are interested in
do you think it's an important criteria
or it would be great to see people in
positions of leadership who've had
wartime experience
um and do you think that some of the
shifts that we've seen in terms of
patterns of leadership over the last
let's just make it real broad so that
this isn't related to any particular
person or stretch of history but over
the last let's just say 25 years
um reflect the fact that we haven't seen
a lot of that at least at the top tiers
of leadership
yeah I think it'd be excellent if people
you know if the president had military
experience for sure I think that then
they understand the with the way the
military works better
um they understand that each civilians
that control the military because a lot
of times people that are civilians don't
understand that the civilians control
the military uh and I think that you do
get to appreciate
what war actually is and what the costs
are I think that
um you know I've I've seen in the same
vein of people asking me to run for
political office I've heard you know
I've seen comments saying oh that's what
we need another warm a war Monger in in
office and
I've responded a few of those I think if
there's any if there's any group of
people that don't want war it's people
that have seen it people that understand
what the what the sacrifices are
and I think that I think that being in
the military
people understand that better so yeah I
think it'd be a great qualification I
don't think it's mandatory I mean
clearly it's not we've had a bunch of
presidents that haven't ever served
anything
really we've had a bunch of presents
that have never served anything but
themselves so
yeah hopefully we'll get some more
people that have some experience in the
military some combat experience would be
especially nice and that would be good
in my opinion
well I'm certainly not one to tell
people what to do and I'm certainly not
going to tell you what to do but should
you ever choose to run I would certainly
um be very enthusiastic about that and
and I will just say that
um
with that stated uh I hope people do
hear what you just said I share that
sentiment people who have led others
besides themselves I think is the is the
key statement there yeah and I I'd look
I just I I have friends that are
politicians and I really appreciate what
they're doing and it looks miserable to
me I don't like I don't like what I good
for them I'm happy that they're in there
trying to make a difference
um
and and I guess this is me being selfish
of me saying look that I don't think I
could stomach that and I also think that
you know right now
I'm
you know I'm trying to help out like for
instance you know we have obviously got
the leadership Consulting industrial on
front we're trying to help businesses
grow I've got origin USA we're bringing
manufacturing back to America we've got
100 and 400 and 450 employees right now
that are here in America working and
growing that business
um obviously the supplements so
everything that I'm doing here right now
is to try and
move
the needle with with America bringing
manufacturing back helping the economy
as much as I can right now so that's
that's kind of what I'm doing right now
uh and and you know my standard answer
which you alluded to is if things got
bad enough
you know then I would
I would do what I had to do
but I don't think people appreciate my
level of bad I'm talking real bad uh so
it's not there yet and hopefully it
never will get there I'd rather
um Surf and hang out with my friends and
and hang out with my family then do that
and hopefully America can can find
some level of balance you know I think
that's the problem that we're having
right now
and a lot of these things that you
talked about but specifically the thing
you talk about with social media is not
very good for political balance
it's it's actually horrible for
political balance and a lot of it has to
do with just the way that those
conversations are had a lot of it has to
do with the ego as well because
I don't ever want to admit that I'm
wrong about anything and if if I can
find something that I think you might be
wrong about it's so satisfying to my ego
to just call you out on that thing and
attack you and I think that's what a lot
of people are doing right now now that
being said also I also usually say this
as well I travel around the country all
the time I work with companies of all
sizes work with people in every
different industry and they're not
they're not sitting around arguing with
each other about what the political
scenery they're talking about hey how
can we grow a business how can we take
care of our workers how can we take care
of our clients how can we take care of
our customer that's what people are
focused on and when you jump on social
media you can get sucked into the
political scene very easily
and that being said also we do have to
pay attention because
you you know we as citizens have to make
sure that that America stays on the on
the correct path within the guard rails
of what this country is based on so we
do have to pay attention
um but I will be doing my part as a
civilian
until there's total Mayhem and Chaos in
the streets then I'll probably just be a
benevolent dictator that takes over
should be an interesting one but hey you
would be you would be the man to lead
under any conditions but thank you for
stating your threshold
um certainly you've earned the right to
make whatever decision it is that you
feel is right for you and I want to say
that
um I agree I feel like we are a country
that still includes a ton of generators
and a ton of projectors that are
interested in projecting the good and
growing the good I do believe both those
phenotypes are important
I also want to just say thank you for
being a generator of so much useful
knowledge you know in science we have a
saying which is you know somebody is an
N of one this is a rare thing to hear
about oneself or to hear about somebody
because what it means is that somebody
is in a category in which pretty much
everything that they do and they say
matters and serves a purpose which is a
useful and important building purpose
and I will look at you and tell you that
you are an N of one you certainly would
meet that criteria under any conditions
and it's evident in the many companies
that you're running in the leadership
that you're doing and also in your
online presence I mean that's how I
initially came to learn about you
I'm now fortunate to have two lengthy
conversations with you and a few
interspersed as well and and I'm I think
of myself as a reasonable to perhaps
good Observer of like how people behave
in different domains and
every time you post or every time you
speak or every time you do you go on a
podcast or host a podcast it's clear
that not only are you prepared and not
only you approaching it with a spirit of
um of seriousness that deserves but
sometimes also lightness that it
deserves but there's always an element
of give and that you're trying to
encourage people to do better for
themselves so as somebody who's greatly
benefited from the knowledge that you've
put out there from the very first Tim
Ferriss and Joe Rogan episodes to your
own podcast I want to extend a personal
thanks I also want to extend great
thanks for coming on here today talking
to a geek scientist who's but who also
happens to be a fellow punk rocker
because that Spirit and the heart that's
behind it you know I think some people
think it's all about you know noise and
Chaos it's actually about being really
true to yourself that's how I think
about the punk rock spirit is really
about being true to yourself and
realizing that the thing that you like
while it might be quite different is
actually if that's you you have to live
in that in that vein and stick with it
it certainly served me well and it
sounds like it served you well but
mostly I just want to extend an enormous
thank you you know as a civilian thank
you for the work you did in the military
but also teaching people about the
military I think a lot of people don't
realize what it's about at any level and
learning about your experience there and
what you've observed bringing other
people's experiences from the military
more broadly is super important and
sharing this and being able to entertain
some of my um scientific Rifts so thank
you thank you
thank you
well I appreciate it I can um
it's kind of weird you say all these
nice things to me I definitely don't
deserve them I'm kind of a regular dude
that that just kind of showed up I guess
at the right time and uh and told some
stories about some guys that were true
heroes and just um uh trying to share my
perspective but it's not just my
perspective you know I'm I'm talking
about stories that I live but there's
plenty of people that have done way more
than I've ever done and and sacrificed
infinitely more than I ever sacrificed
so I'm I'm
thankful for being here I know that you
put all kinds of information and I the
same back at you you know I I have
greatly benefited from the information
that you put out and so I thank you as
well and uh appreciate coming on here
and appreciate you spreading the word
about how people can be better yourself
so thanks for having me I appreciate it
man I appreciate you and appreciate this
time and let's do it again check thank
you for joining me for today's
discussion with Jocko willink I hope you
learned as much as I did in terms of
actionable knowledge to use in our
everyday lives if you'd like to learn
more about Jocko's work and the various
things he's involved in please check out
the Jocko podcast please also check out
the various links in the show note
captions to Jocko's excellent books on
leadership both for adults and for kids
and check out some of the other links
that relate to some of his other
business ventures if you're learning
from and or enjoying this podcast please
subscribe to our YouTube channel that's
a terrific zero cost way to support us
in addition please subscribe to the
podcast on Spotify and apple and on both
Spotify and apple you can leave us up to
a five-star review if you have questions
for us or topics that you'd like us to
cover or guests that you'd like me to
include on the huberman Lab podcast
please put those suggestions in the
comments section on YouTube I do read
all the comments in addition please
check out the sponsors mentioned at the
beginning and throughout today's episode
that's the best way to support this
podcast on various episodes of The
huberman Lab podcast we discuss
supplements while supplements aren't
necessary for everybody many people
drive tremendous benefit from them for
things like enhancing sleep Focus
hormone support and many other features
of mental health physical health and
performance the huberman Lab podcast is
proud to be partnered with momentous
supplements momentous supplements are of
the very highest quality and they focus
on single ingredient formulations which
is very important if you are going to
develop the most cost effective and
biologically effective supplement
regimen for you in addition they ship
internationally which is important
because I know many of you reside out
outside of the United States if you'd
like to see the supplements discussed on
this podcast you can go to
livemomentis.com huberman and there you
can also get 20 off any of momentous
supplements if you're not already
following us on social media we are
huberman lab on Instagram Twitter
Facebook and Linkedin and in particular
on Instagram I cover science and science
related tools some of which overlap with
the contents of the huberman Lab podcast
much of which is distinct however from
the contents of the huberman Lab podcast
again it's huberman lab on all social
media platforms and if you haven't
already subscribe to our neural network
newsletter it's a zero cost monthly
newsletter you simply sign up with your
email by going to hubermanlab.com the
newsletter includes summaries of podcast
episodes we have tool kits for Sleep
tool kits for Focus tool kits related to
deliberate cold exposure heat exposure
and much much more again all zero cost
you provide your email to sign up we do
not share your email with anybody there
are also sample newsletters there that
you don't even need to sign up for you
can just download the PDF for view them
on your computer or phone screen thank
you once again for joining me for my
discussion with Jocko willink and as
always thank you for your interest in
science
[Music]
