welcome to the huberman Lab podcast
where we discuss science and
science-based tools for everyday life
I'm Andrew huberman and I'm a professor
of neurobiology and Ophthalmology at
Stanford school of medicine today my
guest is Dr Kyle Gillette Dr Carl
Gillette is a dual board certified
physician in family medicine and obesity
medicine and an expert in hormone
optimization he is an MD that is a
medical doctor and he treats patients
with a variety of backgrounds ages and
goals today we discuss male hormone
optimization we discuss behavioral tools
nutrition-based tools supplement based
tools prescription drug based tools and
their interactions in determining
overall levels of testosterone free
testosterone
dihydrotestosterone estrogen growth
hormone thyroid hormone and many other
hormones that impact mood libido
well-being strength cognition and
various psychological factors we've
covered hormone optimization in both men
and women in previous episodes of The
huberman Lab podcast but today's
discussion is different
Dr Kyle Gillette offers very specific
recommendations for people with
different goals and of different ages
and we get deep into the weeds of for
instance how does one know whether or
not their testosterone is optimized or
not how often to test for specific
hormones such as testosterone and other
hormones and really how to gauge how
good one should feel this is something
that's often overlooked in discussions
about hormone optimization or health
optimization of any kind for that matter
for instance people will talk about
reduced libido and discuss whether or
not testosterone levels are to blame but
how does one calibrate their libido in
the first place that is how does one
know whether or not their libido is
normal too low or too high
we also discuss for instance whether or
not hormone optimization should be
pursued continually throughout the year
for instance whether or not you should
cycle on and off supplements and or
prescription drugs geared towards
hormone optimization and we discuss the
behavioral foundations of optimal
hormone function these are things that
every male should be doing and various
things they should actively avoid if
their goal is to have healthy hormones
and to quote unquote optimize their
levels of every hormone from growth
hormone to testosterone at any stage of
life and while today's discussion is
about male hormone optimization I want
to emphasize that we discuss all the
various ages for male hormone
optimization so for those of you that
are parents for those of you that are
young those of you that are middle aged
or old or teenagers
we explore adolescent
puberty
teen and late teens early adulthood
adulthood and into the late geriatric
ages so regardless of your age and
whether or not you were male or female
today's episode ought to be of interest
to you I should also point out that we
will soon also be hosting an expert
guest on female hormone optimization one
thing that I'm certain people of all
ages and biological sex will enjoy about
today's conversation is that we also get
into descriptions of how psychology and
life events impact hormones and how
hormones impact our psychology and the
way that we show up to various life
events so today is really a broad
overview that goes all the way down to
fine details about male hormone
optimization and I'm certain that by the
end of today's episode you'll have an
immense amount of new information about
how this endocrine that is hormone
system in your body works and how it
interacts with your brain and other
tissues and many many actionable tools
that you can pursue regardless of stage
of life before we begin I'd like to
emphasize that this podcast is separate
from my teaching and research roles at
Stanford it is however part of my desire
and effort to bring zero cost to
Consumer information about science and
science related tools to the general
public in keeping with that theme I'd
like to thank the sponsors of today's
podcast our first sponsor is thesis
thesis makes custom nootropics and as
I've said many times before on this
podcast I am not a fan of the word
nootropics because it means smart drugs
and frankly there are no specific neural
circuits in the brain or body for being
quote unquote smart thesis understands
this and they've developed custom
nootropics that are designed to bring
your brain and body into the state
that's ideal for what you need to
accomplish they use the highest quality
ingredients things like phosphodidal
serine Alpha GPC many ingredients I've
talked about before on this podcast and
that I happen to use myself I've been
using thesis for over a year now and I
can confidently say that their
nootropics have been a game changer for
me I like their nootropic for clarity I
use that before cognitive work often and
I like their nootropic for energy and I
often use that before workouts in
particular workouts that are especially
intense to get your own personalized
nootropic starter kit go online to
takethesis.com huberman take their
three-minute quiz and thesis will send
you four different formulas to try in
your first month again that's
takethesis.com huberman and use the code
Huber minute checkout to get 10 off your
first box today's episode is also
brought To Us by Roka Roku makes
eyeglasses and sunglasses that are the
absolute highest quality the company was
founded by two All-American swimmers
from Stanford and everything about Roka
eyeglasses and sun glasses were designed
with performance in mind I've spent a
lifetime working on the biology the
visual system and I can tell you that
your visual system has to contend with
an enormous number of challenges in
order for you to see clearly for
instance when you move from a sunny area
to a shady area and Back Again whether
or not you're looking at something up
close or often to the distance Roka
understands the biology of the visual
system and has designed their eyeglasses
and sunglasses accordingly so you always
see with perfect clarity Roca eyeglasses
and sunglasses were initially designed
for activities such as running and
cycling and indeed they are very
lightweight most of the time I can't
even remember that they're on my face
they're so lightweight but the important
thing to know about Roka eyeglasses and
sunglasses is that while they can be
used during sports activities they also
have a terrific aesthetic and they can
be used just as well for wearing to work
or out to dinner Etc if you'd like to
try Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses you
can go to Roka that's roka.com and enter
the code huberman to save 20 off on your
first order again that's Roca roka.com
and enter the code huberman at checkout
today's episode is also brought To Us by
Helix sleep Helix makes mattresses and
pillows that are of the absolute highest
quality I started sleeping on a helix
mattress well over a year ago and it's
been the best sleep that I've ever had
one of the things that makes Helix
mattresses so unique is that they match
the design of the mattress to your
unique sleep needs so for instance if
you go onto their website you can take a
brief quiz it's only takes about two or
three minutes and you'll answer
questions like do you tend to run hot or
cold throughout the night or whether or
not you sleep on your back your side of
your stomach or maybe you don't know
regardless they will match you to the
custom mattress that's ideal for your
sleep needs for me that was the dusk
dusk mattress which for me was not too
firm not too soft and was ideal for my
sleep patterns
you take the quiz and you'll find out
what mattress is ideal for your sleep
patterns so if you're interested in
upgrading your mattress go to
helixsleep.com huberman take their brief
sleep quiz and they'll match you to a
customized mattress and you'll get up to
200 off any mattress order and two free
pillows they have a 10 year warranty and
you get to try out the mattress for 100
nights risk free again if you're
interested you can go to helixsleep.com
huberman for up to 200 off and two free
pillows the huberman Lab podcast is now
partnered with momentous supplements to
find the supplements we discuss on the
huberman Lab podcast you can go to live
momentous spelled ous live momentous.com
huberman and I should just mention that
the library of those supplements is
constantly expanding again that's
livmentis.com huberman and now for my
discussion with Dr Kyle Gillette Dr
Gillette great to have you back
great to be back thank you
I'd like to begin with a question about
one of the most mysterious and important
phases of life which is puberty
I've long wondered whether or not
how quickly somebody goes into puberty
so at what age and how long puberty
takes so how brief or protracted that
puberty is for them to acquire the
so-called secondary sexual
characteristics things like hair growth
on the face for males or
changes in bone and muscle density and
growth Etc you know
when I was in Middle School and High
School I noticed that some people
transitioned into all that very fast and
some people took a long time to acquire
those characteristics
can we learn anything about ourselves
our hormones and maybe even how long
we're going to live based on the time in
which we enter puberty and how long it
takes us to progress through puberty I
guess that also raises the question does
puberty ever truly end
there are many takeaways from puberty
some of the actionable items from it is
yes it can and does affect your adult
height and also stature and also body
composition
so puberty is a time
um and if you're if we're talking
specifically about males
think of it as a a time where if you
have obesity as a child you could
potentially use that time to change your
lifestyle and habits and reset things
and it is a bit easier
it's almost like a a free injection of
testosterone and metabolism and drive
and effort into your life
there is a wide variation in how quickly
puberty goes through so there's stages
called Tanner stages
which we don't necessarily need to get
into but if you enter puberty very early
then it can decrease your adult height
or stature
so for a given male that enters puberty
at 13 versus a male that enters puberty
at 15 can we say that the guy that
entered puberty at 13 is going to be
shorter than the guy that had entered
puberty at 15 or it's not quite that
straightforward if they are identical
twins and the individual who enter
puberty at age 13 also finished puberty
went all the way through the Tanner
stages and if you do a bone scan which I
believe is usually done on the left
wrist and it says yes your growth plates
are mostly closed you're not going to
grow more than a couple inches of height
after that
uh just a related question when I was
growing up it was thought or at least
people would say that resistance
training in particular lifting heavy
weights could stunt one's growth is that
true or false
it is false when you're talking about
just lifting heavy weights dirty bulking
certainly has the potential to stunt
one's growth for two main mechanisms
could you define dirty bulking so uh
dirty bulking is eating an excess of
calories not just to acquire lean
metabolically active body mass or get
stronger but a purposely acquiring body
fat
so purposely acquiring muscle and fat by
overeating yes and lifting weights can
stunt one's growth do I have that
correct correct so it does two things if
you're doing it as a very young child it
can that fat can can become leptin
resistant and it can produce more leptin
and that leptin can activate the
hypothalamus which activates the
pituitary which releases gonadotropins
which basically just increase
testosterone and estrogen earlier than
it otherwise would have it's the same
mechanism behind why childhood obesity
causes early puberty interesting I do
remember a paper published in Science
magazine I believe it was focused mainly
on females but showing that when enough
body fat accumulates the hormone leptin
is secreted and that triggers the onset
of puberty given the increase in
childhood obesity that we're observing
now are we seeing an earlier onset of
puberty in males and females yes and
both males and females not to get too
technical but there's a
g-protein-coupled receptor on the
hypothalamus and leptin directly binds
it so it does appear directly causatory
and not just correlation okay so and if
I understand correctly what you're
saying is for a young guy let's say 13
14 who wants to really bulk up and
deliberately deliberately excuse me
overeats and is doing their squats and
deadlifts and bench presses and really
trying to get big they will get big but
only in the lateral Dimension they are
they're effectively limiting their total
height and it can shut down the long
bone growth of of their limbs is that
correct correct the the growth of the
long bones is mostly related to the
estradiol Alpha receptor so basically
one of the receptors for estrogen which
can be secondary 32 early puberty and
also is related to body fat because you
have that conversion of testosterone to
estrogen
so can we assume that if a young male
wants to get into resistance training
that body weight exercises are probably
okay and maybe even some weight training
kettlebells Etc but that they should
avoid doing so-called dirty bulking
trying to deliberately gain weight up
until what age until puberty is over
I would say an individual should limit
the amount of body abnormal body fat
accumulation or dirty bulking
indefinitely throughout their entire
life so again if I understand correctly
that recommendation to avoid deliberate
weight gain or rapid weight gain is not
just to allow an individual to reach
their maximum height but also to avoid
laying down a lot of body fat cells
correct
correct the balance between that is when
you are going through puberty you are
able to add a lot of lean body mass not
just muscle mass but bone mass and other
mass as well
I started lifting weights when I was 16
and I confessed I trained pretty heavy
at times I don't know whether or not I
would have been taller than I am now but
when I started that training I had
already reached what was at least close
to my predicted height
um I can't say that I deliberately
waited until I'd grown it just so
happened that I stumbled into the weight
room and found that I liked it at age 16
at which point I was already the height
that I am now so in any case what I'm
hearing is that laying down a lot of
excess body fat is not a good idea what
if somebody grows up chubby or fat for
whatever reason reasons related to the
eating patterns in their family maybe
even some genetic reasons is it safe and
or wise for a young person so let's say
somebody who's around the age of puberty
or even younger or in their late teens
to be dieting and actively trying to
lose body fat is that safe
under the supervision of a physician it
is certainly safe to change your body
composition in pediatric obesity
medicine you're often talking about a
recomposition or a renormalization of
the growth curve compared to peers
great thank you so as you may have since
we started chronologically with puberty
and I know that there's another puberty
that even precedes the puberty that
we're all familiar with maybe if you
want to just briefly mention that
because I was talking with you about
this before we started the puberty that
I'm most familiar with and I think most
people are most familiar with the
acquisition of deepening of the voice uh
growth of muscle and bone body hair
acquisition of libido and things like
that that's actually the second puberty
that we all go through maybe just
mention for us and educate us on the
first puberty I think most people will
be
hearing this for the very first time
the first puberty of everyone's life is
the first three months of their life you
may notice that your baby has more acne
the first three months and that they
also have
um in general just more changes related
to androgens and estrogens perhaps
oilier skin even more genital urinary
like genital growth during the first
three months and this is mostly due to
DHEA which is an adrenal hormone the
second puberty or the puberty that most
people know of actually starts that same
way as well it's called adrenarchy and
it's when the adrenals kick in
um I guess for the second time is there
a standard age or age range in which the
testicles descend in males
usually before birth
um it is not uncommon to have one or
even two undescended testes but there is
a risk of testicular cancer especially
if they are not fixed early and also
heat damage to the testy
well thank you for that coverage of the
two puberties so early in life I imagine
some of our listeners probably
um still in one or the other well one or
the other puberty the ones that are in
the first puberty obviously aren't aware
that they're listening to this podcast
but maybe it'll be embedded in their
subconscious but some listeners probably
are still in puberty but I think
everyone can remember back to their
puberty and roughly when they first
entered puberty and how quickly they
aggregated the secondary sex
characteristics I'd like to turn now to
a general question
about what all males ought to do in
order to optimize their hormones so if
you could just list off the things that
all males should do on a daily basis
weekly basis I mean should guys in their
teens and 20s be getting their blood
work done should they be taking
supplements we already talked about
weight training what should they be
doing what should they avoid doing if
the goal is to have a long Arc of
healthy hormone optimization throughout
the lifespan
there's many things that you should do
an analogy that I often make is when
there's a brand new car that comes off
the assembly line you do a full scope of
diagnostic work up hook it up to the
computer and I think we should do the
same thing with humans as well dear and
puberty you know obviously you're a
functioning human but I would say
there's still development and I think
that the the human always develops I
don't think development ever ends but
you want to monitor that progress across
a person's lifespan
so oh sorry so for blood work I mean
what would be the earliest
um let me put it this way if blood work
didn't cost anything and everyone could
get it when would you want to see
everybody get their blood work done for
the first time
obviously uh individuals under the age
of 18 should talk with their parents
about this and as long as that uh the
parents and the child kind of agree and
the parents are on board with this as
well you can start getting blood work
often a child will come in with
complaints of either precocious puberty
or delayed puberty and this individual
might be nine or this individual might
be 15 for a healthy child when they're
going through kind of their later Tanner
stages which is four and five so they've
developed several secondary sexual
characteristics they might have hair
growth or starting to notice more beard
growth that's a good time to do it if
you're concerned with stature or height
or if you're not tracking along where
most members of your family have not
just their height and stature but also
the timing of their puberty then that's
time to get lapsed right so if I could
travel back in time I would have gotten
my blood work done for hormones and
lipids and everything else at 18. I
unfortunately didn't know where and how
to get that and I didn't have any
pressing clinical issues and so I think
the first time that I got my blood work
done I was in my late 20s maybe even my
early 30s and I'm still dying to know
what my blood work was when for instance
I was 17 and I felt a certain way and I
and I confessed that in many dimensions
I actually feel better now at I'll be 47
soon at 47 than I did in my teens and
20s and I think it was more on the
psychological side I think that but in
terms of
just understanding why we felt great or
why we felt or feel terrible or not so
great I think blood work is extremely
informative what do you think are the
key things to look for in blood work I
mean testosterone is always the topic
that comes up in the context of male
hormone optimization but certainly there
are a lot of other hormones that are
important as well and with testosterone
you want to get either testosterone and
shbg or a free testosterone could you
define shpg for our listeners please it
is sex hormone binding globulin it is
the protein that binds up all androgens
and estrogens of the body so the
stronger the Androgen the stronger it
binds during puberty strong androgens
especially DHT which is the strongest
bioidentical Androgen has a huge role a
prominent role in secondary sexual
characteristics
and if your shbg is very high then your
DHT can run higher because it's not
metabolized but there's not quite as
much free DHT so you want to balance
between
um a high enough free DHT and a high
enough total DHT and obviously these
blood tests are going to have to be read
and interpreted by a qualified physician
most people aren't going to be in a
position to evaluate them properly or at
least not with the full depth that they
could if they had an MD like yourself
looking at them okay so everyone should
get blood work as early as possible
depending on their budget and
availability what should everybody do in
terms of monitoring those markers so
assuming that there's no major
intervention how often do you recommend
that people get their blood work done
let's say we let's take an individual
who just turned 18 they just got their
first set of blood work they'll probably
find something in it that they may want
to optimize using shared decision making
with their physician
usually a good follow-up is about six
months okay so twice a year getting
blood work done and having a physician
evaluate it that sounds reasonable to me
and for those that didn't initiate this
at 18 such as myself
it's the best time to start then would
be as soon as possible yeah right
um in terms of the other things that all
male should do meaning all males of all
ages puberty and Beyond should do
what what are some of those things so on
a daily basis uh maybe you could just
take us through the Arc of a day and um
and push out some of the protocols that
you use or the things that you like to
see your male patients use in order to
try and optimize their hormone status
I'll briefly touch on some of the
lifestyle pillars to start diet and
exercise are the first two in puberty
sleep is particularly important of
course
but with diet and exercise
throughout a lifespan you want to not
exclude things that are helping you for
example during puberty if you're
consuming Dairy and then all of a sudden
you cut out all dairy dairy can help
increase igf-1 and free igf-1 and just
uh we're good for our audience maybe you
just mentioned what IG what having
enough igf-1 can do for us that's
beneficial is it helps you grow it helps
with genital development secondary
sexual characteristics and long bone
growth skin Growth Hair growth a host of
things so getting an array of nutrients
that include Dairy what other sorts of
nutrients are important during
development
you want to have adequate vitamin D
vitamin D helps with testosterone
production it helps again with bone
mineralization
and stature after an age of about 25 and
there's not a strict cutoff
but up to about an age of 25 optimizing
your growth hormone and igf-1 helps with
bone density and bone growth
so from the dietary standpoint you want
to have enough free estrogen not too
much when you're growing but you want to
help
basically stockpile bone to prevent a
risk of osteoporosis or thin bones
fractures when you're older or someone
who broke his left foot five times while
in high school I can say you know
whatever young people can do to optimize
their bone density would be great that
problem seems to have resolved itself
over time but I don't know back then I
was I did a short run as a vegetarian
but I've always been an omnivore
um I realized that some of this relates
to ethics and food allergies and things
of that sort but would you say that on
balance that most people would benefit
from eating a combination of you know
quality proteins from animal sources and
non-animal sources fruits vegetables and
starches I mean what do you think for
instance about people following a pure
carnivore or a very uh pure vegan diet
in their 20s and 30s
in their late 20s it might be a
reasonable option in early 20s and
certainly teens it is a horrible idea
because it is likely to significantly
decrease your free androgens so you will
have less testosterone acting on
receptors through the body
are there any other micronutrients or
macronutrients that people in their 20s
and 30s should emphasize
we haven't really touched on fatty acids
or Fiber too much fiber is going to be
Paramount and kind of like setting your
set point of your gut microbiome the
rest of your life there is Prebiotic
fiber which you could think of as fish
food for your good gut microbiome your
gut microbiome is kind of like an
aquarium or a fish tank no I'm just
thinking about goldfish swimming around
in that the Goldfish eating people don't
eat goldfish people thank you live or
dead yeah but any fiber or food that
you're putting in your gut it's either
going to it's going to skew your gut
microbiome towards something that is
more beneficial or more detrimental and
would you say that the Prebiotic fiber
and the getting essential fatty acids
that would be important to do throughout
the lifespan or just for people in their
20s and 30s throughout the lifespan
particularly important in the teenage
20s 30s because that helps with brain
development you're certainly more of an
expert than me when it comes to
um brain development but it does
continue to develop through really
throughout the lifespan but certainly
through the 20s and 30s as well about um
taking a multivitamin while you're
growing up so many people do that is it
necessary is it useful and if it's not
necessary is it safe to do anyway
it's generally safe to do anyway
I do not think everybody needs a
multivitamin
the more exclusionary your diet is for
example if you have celiac disease or if
you're planning on fertility soon then
perhaps it's more reasonable to take a
multivitamin in a previous discussion of
ours I asked you about caloric
restriction and testosterone and if I
recall correctly the idea was that if
somebody is overweight they have excess
fat adipose tissue then getting rid of
some of that adipose tissue but through
caloric restriction and exercise
provided it's done not too fast in a
healthy way is going to be beneficial
for testosterone in the long run but
that for individuals who are not
carrying in excess of body fat caloric
restriction is actually going to lower
testosterone
first of all do I have that correct and
second are there any
um addendums to that that you'd like to
to give us now
that's correct
um if you look at an individual in a
caloric deficit several changes will
happen one is that they'll have less
building blocks for hormones another is
that they will be in a catabolic State
more often so that balance of anabolism
and catabolism will be different they'll
likely have less signaling from growth
hormone and igf-1 and they'll also have
the high shbg that we defined earlier as
The Binding protein so they're free
androgens and free estrogens will go
down
okay so we touched on sleep being
critical I would say throughout the
lifespan try and get
enough quality sleep at least 80 percent
of the nights of your life and the other
20 are just what happens when there's
noise outside or you're stressed it just
you have an exam or you're having a
great time for whatever reason a lot of
good good reasons to lose some sleep now
and again as well but so we have sleep
we've got
um nutrition and we touched on that
we'll get back into supplementation
what are some of the other pillars of
creating a proper environment for
hormone optimization
uh stress is probably the next one
um during uh both puberty but also the
20s and 30s
individuals are figuring out how they
want to cope with stress and also
figuring out what they want to choose to
put their effort into
so if someone is over stressed then it
can have it can
put all the other lifestyle pillars and
then they stop dieting well they stop
exercising and everything else can go
Askew
there is also some degree of social
component to this so perhaps I need to
add a seventh pillar of social
you know during your 20s and 30s you may
be forming a family as well perhaps you
have children and the health of the
family unit is going to be vitally
important not only not necessarily
directly for hormone optimization but
it's going to throw everything else off
if it's off and for people that are not
starting their own families in their 20s
and 30s can that social connection be
extended to friendships and work
relationships as well absolutely in fact
if someone's not starting a family it it
is just as concerning but for other
reasons each individual is going to have
their close group of family and friends
and if someone does not have one of
those connections that's when things can
potentially get bad not just for them
individually but also Society So when
you say stress you mean learn to manage
your stress what does that look like I
mean when if a patient um you know has
high blood pressure even if they don't
um you just sense that they're stressed
they have a lot of pressured speech or
they're not feeling well or
communicating that they're not doing
well what are some of the things that
you recommend in order to try and
ameliorate that stress
there's different mindfulness or
relaxation techniques going outside can
often help with this as well
dietary changes in exercise can help
with this too some people like prayer or
meditation and a lot of people like
counseling or therapy or even just
talking openly with a family member or a
friend
what would be some of the other pillars
for hormone optimization here I feel
like we're not just talking about people
in their 20s and 30s but again we're
wrapping our arms around basically
puberty onward I mean I I mean gosh I
looking back I I started meditating
pretty early I started weight training
and running early I gave some thought to
my diet in high school but really was in
college that I started thinking more
about what I was ingesting and why and
trying to do better there but people are
coming to the table at different stages
of
um life and trying to optimize for
hormones so you know so what what would
be some of the additional things that
everybody should do
everyone should get outside and find a
movement past time to last a lifetime
you're going to get sunlight you're
going to get some degree of heat and
cold exposure and you're also just going
to move more being in an artificial
environment where there's artificial
lights artificial air conditioning is
going to have many effects on your body
so that's vital another one is finding
what your purpose is in life so I call
this Spirit but it's really just the
self-actualization component of Maslow's
hierarchy of needs which is basically
your physical needs your mental needs
and then your purpose in life what you
really like to do now picking some goal
or Target I always say that you don't
have to stick to the same goal over time
certainly I haven't although I got
started early in the science game and
I'm still in it the idea is not to pick
the end goal is to pick a goal and then
once you reach that goal to assess and
then pick another goal and so on I think
sometimes when people hear about picking
a purpose they're like oh my goodness I
have to Define sort of like naming
oneself that you you actually can change
your your goals and purpose over time
this is terrific would you uh suggest
that people actively use or avoid
supplementation
um prior to doing all these other things
I'm somebody who likes to throw the
kitchen sink at things but I also like
to do things pretty systematically so I
always say behaviors first then
nutrition then supplementation and then
maybe and if and only if there's a real
need and of course working with a doctor
prescription drugs but you know there
are probably people in their 20s or 30s
maybe even in their 50s that aren't
feeling great and they want to do
something in order to be able to train
more and or to
um feel more confident to seek out
social connection they try and go go
about the whole business from the other
from the other side as well what are
your thoughts on that
I see supplements and medications as
very similar ones prescribed and one's
not in general medications have more
side effects or potentially stronger
therapeutic with more efficacy
but they're just tools to reach an end
goal so depending on the goal if there's
an individual that's an athlete then
certainly they should consider
supplementation or if someone desires
optimal or very a very high level of
cognitive performance they should also
consider supplementation at the same
time food is medicine and a lot of the
benefits you can get in supplements you
can get in food as well I guess it
depends on how much time and energy
you're willing to spend and also
finances you know I know that when I was
in college I could afford just a few
supplements and they were basically whey
protein and some fish oil I was
fortunate that I was pointing the
direction of those things and some
creatine I couldn't afford much else
over time of course I could afford more
but it really does often depend on on
finances
before we get into some specific
recommendations to optimize testosterone
estrogen thyroid growth hormone Etc I
want to ask you a question I've been
wondering about for a long time you know
so often in the discussion about male
hormone optimization people will say
well you know if your libido is
suffering you know you might want to be
concerned about testosterone or even
estrogen right because we know that
estrogen can impact libido as well
sometimes having estrogen too low is
detrimental for libido or people will
say you're not recovering from workouts
or you're just you're feeling kind of
depressed the problem is it's all
subjective so how does one know whether
or not their recovery from workouts
their energy their confidence their
libido is within a healthy range I mean
obviously for people in a relationship
they can know whether or not their
libido matches the sort of cadence of of
the relationship in their partner but
how should people think about this and
maybe even start to talk about it
because one of the big differences I
think between
males and females is that because
females have a monthly cycle they are
familiar with the changes that occur in
their hormones over time because every
28 days those hormones are changing
dramatically in ways that impact their
physiology and psychology but for males
I feel like they're sort of a a dearth
of language to get into the more subtle
aspects of this it also has to do with
privacy issues and people feeling like
they don't want to over share too much
not knowing what's appropriate to share
but when you talk to a patient who's in
their 30s or maybe even their 70s or 60s
doesn't matter a male patient what are
you listening for and uh you know I know
you're not a psychiatrist but you know
what are your ears tuned to in order to
try and figure out whether or not this
person could really use some help with
hormone optimization or whether or not
something else or maybe they're just
doing great and they don't realize it
because they're placing demands on
themselves that are excessive
you want to you want to use a lot of
open-ended questions this process is
called motivational interviewing
and your goal is to listen to the
patient and not plant an idea in their
mind that they can follow
because everybody is going to have a
different goal some people are better at
reading their biofeedback or telling how
they feel on a daily basis
there is screening questionnaires
designed for example an atom
questionnaire to look at men's men's
health and hormone-related health it's
called an atom question
a-d-a-m correct is it available online
that people could administered to
themselves although we don't want people
making clinical diagnoses of themselves
or anyone else is it that sort of exam
it is interesting I don't believe it is
a clinically validated tool like an
ascvd which is like a risk of heart
attack and stroke tool or many other
tools there's one for depression there's
one for anxiety they're called phq-9 and
Gad 7 respectively but anyway there's
often an Inc the atom questionnaire and
what you hear from the patient if you
are a very careful listener is often
different
can you give me an example of some of
the questions on this atom questionnaire
or the sorts of motivational
interviewing that you might do so let's
say I'm your patient I sit down what
sorts of questions would you ask to
probe these kinds of dimensions of
hormones questions about libido
questions about athletic performance
questions about motivation and often a
patient will answer one thing about what
you hear from them subjectively is far
different interesting can you give me an
example of a question I'm happy to be
the the guinea pig here a classic one is
a guy comes in and a lot of times they
say oh no the wife made me go to the
doctor I go once a year that's it I
don't want anything I don't want any
medications
their screening questionnaires might be
zeros across the board so nothing no
issues they're apparently in perfect
health
they talked to you for a while they get
some Rapport they like you and then
right as you're finishing up the visit
and about to go out the room
they mentioned that
um their libido isn't quite there and
they're having a little bit of Ed as
well and perhaps they're even having
some chest pressure tightness I see so
right as you're leaving the room a
patient will tell you that they're
having some sexual side effects or not
side effects they're having some sexual
challenges and then they'll mention
chest pressure is the chest pressure a
sort of General Decoy for it's got to be
my heart or is it um or is it related to
the other things they're reporting it
can be related in fact erectile
dysfunction is known as the canary in
the coal mine so coal miners would take
the canary down and it would the canary
would die before the coal miners would
have I believe carbon monoxide poisoning
and often one of the causes of ede is
plaque buildup which can happen in the
coronaries as well but sometimes they
notice the symptom and the genitals
before they do in the coronaries so for
such a patient let's say that patient
was a young person where plaque buildup
in the arteries and veins is not all
that likely if there are let's say in
their 20s or 30s what would be your next
step of the interview at that point and
what what would you consider would you
immediately order labs for that person
to try and rule out any kind of um
actual hormone level deficiency I
certainly would order Labs there are
some individuals that are very similar
and they come in and they have the same
symptoms and one individual might have a
very very high testosterone and one
individual might be severely hypogonadal
so there's a big difference between the
subjective and what the labs look like
so I certainly order Labs you also ask
them about if it's situational or not
you ask them if they have Ed if they're
you know they ask them about their
habits you even ask about porn and
masturbation and all these issues and of
course it's between the doctor and the
patient and depending on what they tell
you you can often determine if there is
a situational component some people call
it it's psychogenic Ed but I don't love
the term psychogenic Ed because it kind
of puts some some blame on the patient's
mind
but a lot of the time that is the case
there's even a test and this is very
rarely ordered but it's called a
nocturnal penile tumescence now because
is is it true that there are periodic
erections during sleep correct yeah so
you basically put a cuff to see if
you're having a normal sized erection
during sleep and I believe about 90
percent of the time they do that test
they are indeed having erections which
would point to this psychogenic origin
of whatever challenges they're having in
terms of sexual interactions you
mentioned porn and masturbation this
topic has come up a bunch of times on
this podcast and on other podcasts I've
gone on because of the relationship
between dopamine sexual motivation and
sexual behavior and I've been of the
pretty strong stance that well I'm not
judging porn or masturbation it can
create a brain wiring situation where
males in particular
essentially teach their brain to be
aroused by watching other people have
sex as opposed to being the first person
actor in sexual uh interactions so in
that sense
um you know that's more about the brain
wiring and neuroplasticity and dopamine
but what are your thoughts on porn and
masturbation as they relate to hormones
I mean this is a big debate on the
internet in fact one of the most common
debates is whether or not masturbation
increases or decreases testosterone in
males certainly it will decrease
motivation to go find sexual partners we
know this and there are more and more
data on this all the time in terms of
the effects of pornography and
masturbation and here I suppose we need
to be um somewhat specific and
operationally Define what we're talking
about we're talking about porn and
masturbation to the point of ejaculation
right
um because my understanding is that the
ejaculation and orgasm associated with
it cause an increase in prolactin which
blunts libido for some period of time
the duration of that will vary from
person to person and Circumstance to
circumstance but basically all of this
points to the fact that
porn and masturbation can really limit
libido in the real world and to me uh
pornography and the screen is not the
real world the screens exist in the real
world the real world doesn't exist in
the screen
that's an accurate statement and
prolactin does have a significant acute
increase after uh ejaculation it does to
some degree after orgasm as well but
prolactin acts on the pituitary to
inhibit the release of the hormones LH
and FSH of which LH can increase
testosterone
so this may be one of the cases where
the dose makes the poison and if it is a
very frequent habit certainly daily or
more than once a day would be very
detrimental from a hormonal component
not even taking into account the the
neural wiring listen I think it's
terrific that you've actually defined
frequency because this is the problem on
the Internet or even in the doctor's
office you'll see
um descriptions about pornography being
dangerous for certain things or
detrimental to hormones people say
frequent but what's frequent so you're
saying daily or multiple times per day
would be potentially detrimental to the
hormone profile of a male of essentially
any age and that's just for masturbation
um with pornography with porn use as
well it would likely be worse why why is
that just this this the sort of
dopaminergic Drive of the stimulus just
a really intense visual stimulus
dopamine sensitivity
um I think that uh using the analogy of
a dopamine wave pool it would deepen the
pool but not increase your supply of
dopamine maybe you could describe the
dopamine wave pool because I think it's
such a powerful way of thinking about
dopamine and what dopamine does in fact
I've um
always credited you and when I've done
it but I've generally uh stolen your
analogy of the dopamine wave pool
because it's so astute
the dopamine wave pool describes the
natural variation of ups and downs in
your dopamine or your motivation and uh
in the wave pool depending on how high
the peak is you often have a deeper
trough
so you do not want to Hive a peak in
addition if your Peak is very very high
for example when you're using a mini
substances like cocaine or like
amphetamines your dopamine can go so
high you lose almost all the water from
the wave pool and then when you crash
from that not only is the trough flow
you have less dopamine in the pool to
begin with
the dopamine receptor is extremely
sensitive as is the Gaba receptor which
is an inhibitory receptor whereas
dopamine is technically a stimulant more
related to Adrenaline or noradrenaline
the depth of the pool can change very
quick so you want to have that happy
medium where you're fairly near the top
but you're not so near the top that the
depth of the pool is going to go down
so if I interpret that in the context of
this discussion about
um libido sex porn of masturbation it if
somebody has a very intense sexual
experience and not not here we're not
necessarily talking about an intense
orgasm we're talking about just in you
know a lot of intense visual so very
um a lot of intense imagery or auditory
input or both
that is going to lead to a situation
where dopamine is going to be depleted
afterwards correct a guest on this
podcast before my colleague at Stanford
Dr Anna lemke's expert in addiction
talked a bit about this as sort of a
seesawing I hear we're talking about a
wave and a crashing out of the water
from the wave pool there was a seesawing
from Pleasure and Pain it was going to
be a longer and deeper period of lack of
pleasure following that and I think a
lot of people think oh well that's great
you know they want the intense
experience but if that intense
experience is coming from pornography
and masturbation or I suppose coming
from you know High adrenaline activities
like you know life uh life-risking
parkour hanging off the side of a
building it inevitably is going to lead
to depressive episodes low libido
episodes that follow is that right
correct in a similar physiologic way
to withdrawal from stimulants like
amphetamines now is sex with a partner
different because there are many people
who are chasing more and more intense
experiences with a partner as opposed to
through pornography and masturbation
again here we're talking about all ages
and I should always say anytime we're
talking about sex with a partner we're
talking I you know the four conditions
that I was um lay out on the human Lab
podcast are that we're talking about
consensual age-appropriate context
appropriate species appropriate
interactions yeah and this is also a
case where the dose makes the poison so
if there's
um you know obviously meeting all those
criteria if they have one preference
that for both of them is a positive
experience then that is likely okay
um you're not going to be able to
maintain dopamine over a certain
threshold for a long period of time so
there very well may be a crash from that
experience as well and the Crash may be
different in one partner than the other
interesting so I'll draw an analogy to
food it'll be like you know you don't
have to serve the banquet meal seven
seven nights of the week maybe just two
is that right and there are other
delicious foods out there yes we'll use
that analogy that is very reasonable
okay not trying to be PG-13 just trying
to uh
um parsimony Occam's razor the ability
to describe a lot of things in in a few
words
I'd like to return to the key things
that people should do or I should say
the key things that men should do to
optimize their hormones so we talked
about getting some movement getting some
sunlight getting Quality Social
connection one way or the other avoid
excessively frequent masturbation and
viewing pornography and for some people
zero might be the optimal number and I
keep coming back to this most people for
most people interesting I feel so
fortunate to have grown up prior to the
availability of Internet pornography
I've never been a big consumer of
pornography I've just not been my thing
but I hear so often from males of all
ages about their addiction to it their
Affliction by it it's really a serious
issue and that's one of the reasons why
I'm grateful that you're willing to talk
about this and your clinical experience
with these patients I'd like to take a
quick break and acknowledge one of our
sponsors athletic greens athletic greens
now called ag1 is a vitamin mineral
probiotic drink that covers all of your
foundational nutritional needs I've been
taking athletic green since 2012 so I'm
delighted that they're sponsoring the
podcast the reason I started taking
athletic greens and the reason I still
take athletic greens once are usually
twice a day is that it gets to be in the
probiotics that I need for gut health
our gut is very important it's populated
by gut microbiota that communicate with
the brain the immune system and
basically all the biological systems of
our body to strongly impact our
immediate and long-term health and those
probiotics and athletic greens are
optimal and vital for microbiotic health
in addition athletic greens contains a
number of adaptogens vitamins and
minerals that make sure that all of my
foundational nutritional needs are met
and it tastes great if you'd like to try
athletic greens you can go to
athleticgreens.com huberman and they'll
give you five free travel packs that
make it really easy to mix up athletic
greens while you're on the road in the
car on the plane Etc and they'll give
you a year's supply of vitamin d3k2
again that's athleticgreens.com huberman
to get the five free travel packs and
the year supply of vitamin D3 K2 in
terms of exercise you know here's again
it's a double-edged sword on the one
hand it's great to get exercise but I'm
familiar with you know if I train an
hour a day you know 10 minutes of
warm-up and 50 minutes to an hour of
weight training or 50 minutes to an hour
of cardio I feel great especially if
once a week I take a complete day off
that's sort of my general schedule I'm
also familiar with when I go out for
runs that are excessively long two-hour
runs or I spend 90 minutes in the gym
too frequently start to feel like
garbage everything suffers my sleep
starts to suffer doesn't matter how much
I eat I don't seem to recover I don't
feel well so I realize that recovery
ability varies between individuals but
what do you think is a healthy
sustainable exercise regimen that anyone
can follow that will also support their
hormone status
for really vigorous exercise around
three to four times a week is very
sustainable over a long period of time
on top of that you could add in three or
four more instances of less vigorous
exercise okay so for Less vigorous what
do you mean that you know zone two
cardio where you can hold a conversation
but beyond which you you can't and for
more vigorous you're you're thinking
weight training or hit uh high intensity
interval type training is that right
correct um you can also weight train and
have some benefit even at a low to
moderate intensity if you think about
um weight training where you have and
it's not necessarily related to the
incidence of Doms which is delayed onset
muscle soreness but if you weight train
lazy or easy from time to time obviously
you want to weight train very heavy from
time to time as well because of more
lean body mass growth but if you weight
train lighter you're going to be able to
do it more often and it can still help
with the hypertrophy of
um collagen for example in tendons and
ligaments
so here again
um I'd like to perhaps drill into this
notion of intensity and light weights
because for me some of the most brutal
workouts I've ever done were in what I
would consider a high repetition range
15 to 50. actually I went up to Oregon
to watch the international track and
field championships we went by the
um Cameron haynes's place right the the
Cameron Haynes and he and his trainer
put us through a workout that was 25 to
50 repetitions per set and it was done
in circuit and it was brutal so it was
light I mean that's those weights were
nothing in some cases it was body weight
but the number of repetitions was brutal
So when you say limiting intensity are
you talking about limiting the number of
sets to failure are you talking about
um really being kind of a lazy bear in
the gym I like to do that everyone so a
long long rest to that sort of thing
um what are your thoughts on that as it
relates to hormone optimization so I'll
just mention and then I'll let you
answer I feel best overall when I'm
training for 10 minute warm-ups and
about 40 35 or 50 minutes of weight
training where I'm pretty lazy between
sets two to three minute rest
raining somewhere in the six to ten rep
range going to failure every once in a
while but mostly getting that sort of
last rep before what I would think is
failure no Force reps that kind of thing
and then jogging on the other days nice
and easy when I do that I feel fantastic
in all other dimensions of life
when I train more intensely than that
even with
lightweight so faster Cadence and lower
rest I feel like garbage I get a
headache I'm kind of ornery I everything
suffers so what are your thoughts on
kind of defining a optimal exercise
strategy for hormones I've never
measured my hormones in those two
different contexts but I have to imagine
that it's cortisol related when they
study the effect of exercise
specifically vigorous exercise
one area that's been studied is vigorous
exercise episodes lasting longer than an
hour
and they usually track it by a rating of
perceived exertion which isn't perfect
and it's not extremely actionable but
it's helpful for clinical science but
the takeaway from that is basically do
not it is not hormonally helpful to
train especially regularly trained
vigorously for longer than an hour
okay so
um I'm happy to hear that because it
sounds like for most people that hour of
work is really the threshold I think
this is important for people to hear
especially males because I think with
all of the incredible examples out there
of people like cam like David Goggins
people who are training for very long
periods of time you know and leaving
aside all issues of what people are
doing in order to optimize the recovery
I think an hour a day of exercise is
just a great program
that most anyone can follow and Beyond
an hour you start running into
challenges and I you know the occasional
90 minute or two hour workout is no big
deal
but if you start doing that more than
once every two months I think you're
headed for trouble have you seen that in
people's blood blood work and in their
hormones do you ever see people that are
just badly over trained because they're
just training too hard and too often yes
when the blood work is particularly bad
they're often in a large caloric deficit
as well
there's a synergistic effect between a
caloric deficit even if you're
maintaining adequate protein intake you
might not be maintaining adequate iron
intake or adequate vitamin D
and you're also just literally in a
caloric deficit perhaps low carbs as
well very low free testosterone
and they're simultaneously doing a lot
of vigorous exercise interesting I often
hear and I'm starting to wonder whether
or not some of the
um
quicker to results nutrition tactics
things like dropping all carbohydrates
or um the quicker to results exercise
Habits Like starting to do six day a
week really intense workouts whether or
not in the short run they work because
they cause the Cosmetic changes that
people are seeking but that they really
undermine the overall goal which is at
least to me to have your hormones maybe
not optimized to the you know 100 but to
always be aiming for 100 and be close to
it at every stage of Life consistency is
key here if you are not consistent then
the law diminishing returns certainly
applies so 80 or 90 percent of the
benefit over many many months is far
better than a hundred percent but only
half the time you know one thing that I
found to be tremendously useful is to
finish the workout while I still have
energy to not take myself to exhaustion
and then I'm able to kind of talk about
the dopamine wave pool I'm able to sort
of ride that into the rest of the day
feeling great I sort of
um save or Bank some of the Vigor from
the training to bring it into my work
but then again I'm not an athlete I get
paid to think and to speak not to uh not
to lift weights or to run another
component of that is the balance between
your sympathetic which is your fight or
flight nervous system and your
parasympathetic which is your rest or
digest nervous system
there is an anecdote which is likely
true that many Elite bodybuilders are
very parasympathetic besides while
they're lifting weights you mean they're
lazy and they like to eat a lot yeah the
lazy bear in the gym kind of phenomenon
absolutely
um but that being said after a very very
vigorous workout for example one where
you're trained to failure which
bodybuilders and power lifters do all
the time you feel the uh tiredness or
you feel the strain from that heavy uh
sympathetic activity when you are
lifting a heavy weight and it can
potentially affect how you feel the rest
of the day so many people who have a job
where that is highly cognitive do not
like to have an extremely vigorous
workout in the morning which is when a
lot of people are able to exercise
when I exercise early in the morning
that is before 9 A.M I have more energy
all day long if I do it mid-morning I
have experienced more of an afternoon
crash there's probably some circadian
biology in there I have also noticed and
I've actually seen in my blood work that
if I don't get out for a 45 minute jog
at least once a week
all of my blood profiles suffer in
direction that I don't want them to go
in particular testosterone and estrogen
move in directions that are not
conducive to my goals
I'd like to talk about some of the
approaches that people can use in order
to optimize hormones and these days
for better for worse I think for Worse
younger guys are asking about and using
testosterone replacement therapy
so-called trt and I just want to frame
this out by saying there is no strict
cut off for what is trt there are plenty
of people whose blood levels of
testosterone and estrogen are in the
within the normal reference range and
decide to start doing these things of
course they can limit fertility there
are a bunch of issues even at
non-quote-unquote steroidal
performance enhancing dosages
um I'd love to frame this up by first
defining our terms because one of the
challenges on the Internet is people
talk about trt then they'll talk about
performance enhancing drugs they'll talk
about steroids they're all steroids
right I mean testosterone estrogen are
both steroid hormones but what one
considered replacement therapy versus
what one considers performance enhancing
is going to depend right so here's my
question
why in the world why in the world would
any male in his teens or 20s or even 30s
whose blood levels of testosterone and
estrogen are at the appropriate levels
meaning within the normal reference
range why would they take exogenous
testosterone given all the negative
effects on fertility some of the
challenges that it can present if the
dosages aren't quite right Etc why would
they do that is certainly if they are
not being paid for a particular Endeavor
like they're not making money if they
are playing a sport chances are they're
not allowed to do that anyway it's it's
on the band substances list so to me it
just seems like a crazy idea
um but then again I'm of a generation
that really hasn't thought about doing
that stuff until people were in their
40s and 50s or even never
so is there ever a case for somebody in
their 20s or 30s to take testosterone
especially if their blood levels are
within the 300 to 900 nanograms per
deciliter reference range not many cases
the reason for any performance enhancing
drug whether or not it is a steroid
synthetic bioidentical or otherwise
it varies a lot some individuals do it
only for cosmetic reasons even if it can
have deleterious effects on like the
Cosmetic appearance for example of your
skin in the long run
but um you know everyone has their
different reason as far as like when
does the benefit outweigh the detriment
not very often if you're
um in your 20s and certainly uh probably
almost hardly never there's always you
know rare cases like Coleman syndrome
and whatnot but
um almost never if you're very young
okay so for people in their 20s 30s and
Beyond 40s Etc whose testosterone and
estrogen levels are at the appropriate
ratios and in the within the normal
reference range and they feel pretty
good right we talked about the Adams
exam or this sort of like feel pretty
good as sort of code for uh libido
energy recovery Etc and are feeling you
know at least um workable for for their
lifestyle
for those people
what can they do besides get great sleep
train but not too hard or too often etc
etc what are some of the things in the
realm of supplementation that can help
them optimize their testosterone and
estrogen without
suppressing their own endogenous
production of testosterone and estrogen
let's mention creatine is the first one
creatine is interesting because it has
multiple different effects that helps
with amino acid synthesis it also helps
with oxidative stress it can also serve
as the backup fuel tank for your
mitochondria so kind of holding back up
ATP and it does slightly increase total
testosterone and it also increases the
conversion of testosterone to
dihydrotestosterone so potentially it's
especially useful in men in their even
their teenage years and their 20s you
mentioned the conversion of testosterone
to dihydro testosterone and there is
mythology out there that creatine can
increase hair loss I'm guessing because
there's at least one study showing that
creatine can increase DHT dihydro
testosterone and DHT is one of the
primary hormones that can promote male
pattern baldness so the question
therefore is does cream creatine
supplementation increase the rate of
hair loss
theoretically it can but in in each
individual
preventing hair loss is a very poor
reason to take creatine because it's not
going to take you to a Supra physiologic
level it's not going to uh you know
increase your androgens to an unnormal
level of binding
so I feel like uh this if that was a
reason to not take creatine for hair
loss then that means for sorry you mean
hair loss is not a reason to avoid
taking creatine correct hair loss is not
a reason to avoid taking creatine it
think of it as just
bringing you to what you are naturally
inclined to have if your conversion of
testosterone and DHT is already high
then often creatine does not affect this
it just kind of resets your balance
between testosterone being aromatized to
estrogen or being five Alpha reduced DHT
so it's not going to speed up hair loss
more than just naturally BML does so in
some individuals it will have no effect
in some individuals for whatever reason
they have almost no 5-alpha reductase
activity it will return them to Natural
or normal I see well I take five grams a
day of creatine monohydrate I do it for
the tissue volumizing effects so for
exercise benefits but also for the
cognitive effects I don't know if it's
increasing my hair loss I mean I've got
a little bit of sort of widow's peak
type hair loss that's where it is for me
um
suppose beard growth is associated with
DHT too most is that right I my what I
learned but then again I haven't been
into this literature in a long time is
that because of change differences in
receptors that DHC causes hair growth on
the face and hair loss on the head is
that right yes and the amount and the
sensitivity and density of those
receptors is genetically determined
and is it true that if your mother's
father was bald that you will be bald in
the same pattern and if that he wasn't
you won't
that is a decent correlation part of the
proposed mechanism of this well there
are several genes and you can actually
test your genes for hair loss you do get
a decent amount of them from your mother
the unique thing you get from your
mother that she may have gotten from her
father that she got one of the copies
from her father is your X chromosome and
the Androgen receptor Gene is on your X
chromosome so all men got their Androgen
receptor Gene from their mother
it's on their X chromosome not on the Y
chromosome correct interesting even
though all of the sort of quote unquote
male male promoting uh genes are on the
Y chromosome like mullerian inhibiting
Etc interesting okay so five grams a day
of creatine for most people should be
fine beneficial for tissue volumizing so
strength I'll bring water into the
muscles and for cognit the cognitive
effects and the clinical support for
creatine I think it's it's quite strong
at the five gram per day dosage now what
other sorts of supplements can people
benefit from we already talked about the
omegas and making sure that people are
getting enough Prebiotic fiber to
support the gut microbiome and vitamin D
uh so what other supplement based tools
can people consider another one we can
Loop in with creatine is betaine some
people are non-responders to creatine so
you can increase that to 10 grams or you
can use its cousin beta en to help with
amino acid synthesis and shunting of
energy along with that I would put
L-Carnitine which is actually the
smallest peptide hormone it's just two
amino acids that are put together so
it's a it's a hormone
more than a hormone yeah I would not
call L-Carnitine a hormone okay but I
would call dopamine a hormone yeah I
could a neuro hormone it's so hard to to
Define things as transmitters or
hormones at some level I agree um so
L-Carnitine
um actually I should backtrack betaine
uh do you recall uh what dosage people
typically would take if they're I
creatine non-responder one to three
grams yeah several versions of creatine
have beta in mixed in because it helps
with the processing of methionine and
homocysteine so if somebody is already
taking creatine and likes it in response
to it I'm going to raise my hand such as
myself would adding betaine help or is
it redundant with creatine only if their
homocysteine is persistently elevated
and homocysteine is kind of like an
inflammatory marker that can build up if
you're not converting enough of it down
the stream how would I know just a blood
test okay or if you knew your MTHFR
polymorphism which is basically how you
add methyl groups to um many things in
the body great any side effects of
Betadine that people should be aware of
not that I know of okay people can look
it up and on examine.com is a great site
for that they'll surely list it they
just revamped their site by the way and
it was awesome before and it's
Platinum now
um so L-Carnitine uh what are the ways
to take L-Carnitine I know that there's
an oral form so capsules and there's
injectables the injectables I think you
need a prescription is that right
correct you need a prescription for the
injectables or you should really get a
prescription for the injectables
for when you inject it
um of course at the supervision of your
doctor it's usually done intramuscularly
it's an aqueous solution so it does not
have like an oil or a carrier oil in it
like TR like testosterone Esters do
however if you inject it too
superficially it's not going to make it
break anything often it just burns if
you inject it subcutaneously and it is
not um disseminate throughout the body
as well
L-Carnitine potentially has localized
effects if you inject it if you ingest
it orally then it has a very low
bioavailability maybe only 10 percent
well I think most people are going to be
able to get L-Carnitine only or you know
in its capsule form so what are the
dosages of L-Carnitine that one needs to
ingest then if they want to get a
benefit because if only 10 is being
absorbed uh it's probably a lot of
L-Carnitine how much should people take
per day usually I recommend for oral
L-Carnitine between 1 000 milligrams and
up to four or five thousand milligrams
so one to four maybe even five grams
correct okay up to five grams a day if
you're on that much especially if you
have a dysregulated gut microbiome you
should be concerned with tmao which is a
potential carcinogen that both carnitine
and choline can convert into
and your gut microbiota determine how
much that happens uh is it true that I
can offset any negative effects of alpha
GPC uh choline that is NL carnitine that
I take by ingesting garlic is that right
there's a compound in garlic called
allicin I believe it's
a-l-l-i-c-i-n it's also part of the
scientific name the genus of types of
garlic and this can help decrease the
conversion to tmao berberine actually
slightly decreases the conversion to
tmao as well probably through alteration
of the gut microbiome and then just
optimizing your gut microbiome can
decrease conversion so not everyone
needs allicin but it's something that
you should certainly consider if you
were on a high dose I'm going to
continue to take the 600 milligrams of
garlic every time I take my L-Carnitine
but I'm going to skip the berberine
because berberine gives me brutal
headaches and it makes me crave
carbohydrates because it drops my blood
sugar it has many other effects
including the dawn phenomenon where it
drops your blood sugar when you're
sleeping and you can't even realize it I
am not a fan of berberine and I'm sorry
for those of you that are I'm not trying
to offend anyone although frankly if
you're being offended by by stance on
berberine then maybe we should have
another discussion in any case um
injectable L carnitine if one can get
that through a doctor how much is
absorbed and how much should one take
almost all of it's absorbed in general
you're taking between 500 milligrams up
to you can take a pretty high dose up to
2 000 milligrams okay and what we did
not talk about is what L-Carnitine does
so why should why should someone go
through all of this is it to optimize
testosterone is it um working on the
receptor side what what's L-Carnitine
doing
it's a shuttle so I think it's named
carnitine palmateal coenzyme a basically
it's it just takes nutrients from
outside your mitochondria and puts them
in it also has a unique effect well not
too unique because tadalafel actually
has this effect as well is that it
increases the density of the Androgen
receptor and the cytoplasm of your cells
so even if your Androgen receptor
sensitivity doesn't change and even if
your testosterone does not change you
will have more testosterone binding to
that increased number of receptors does
one need to cycle L-Carnitine creatine
betaine no reason to cycle any of those
okay what other supplements can one use
to try and improve hormone profiles and
and here I realize we're using a very
broad brush because when we say improve
hormone profiles what are we really
talking about and for me at least I I
think about the subjective
um stuff you know do people feel like
they're going to have more energy as a
consequence of doing these things are
they going to have the more optimized
libido are they going to have more
optimized uh recovery from exercise
right because I mean it's not clear to
me that taking one's testosterone from
600 to 800 is always going to be a good
thing especially if estrogen is
increasing in parallel that could cause
issues it could certainly make things
better it could certainly make things
worse right so with that backdrop what
are some of the other things people can
take and then we'll go back to this
issue of what really is optimization
let's briefly mention vitamin D which is
also a hormone it's actually a sterol
hormone and have if you have deficient
vitamin D and you replace it then you
will optimize your testosterone
let's also mention Boron so if you have
a very high shbg Boron can acutely help
lower it usually in a dose of 5 to 12
milligrams per day it's not really a
sustained effect but Boron is depleted
in soils in many countries I believe
it's very high in soils in Greece and
Turkey so eating dates or raisins that
are from those areas potentially have
more Boron Boron also meat might be one
of the reasons why the reference range
for testosterone is much higher in those
countries than other countries and just
to remind people that shpg sex hormone
mining globulin is attaching to the
testosterone molecule and limiting the
amount of so-called free testosterone
that's available to have its impact on
cells when Dr Peter ertio was on this
podcast in fact sitting in that very
chair he said that the ideal level of
free testosterone in male should be
about two percent of one's total
testosterone do would you agree with
that number or disagree I'm sure Peter
would be fine if you said either two
percent is a good rule of thumb usually
the reference ranges but between about
one and four percent some people do have
genetic polymorphisms in shbg a specific
gene mutation where they have very low
shbgs also men that have varicose veins
in their testes also known as
varicoceles tend to have very high shbgs
so that percentage would likely be less
than two percent so just because your
percentage of free T to Total T is a
little bit above or below two percent
that's okay we just need to figure out
the reason why it is how would somebody
know if they have varicose veins in
their testicles
um especially if their testicles are
still in attached to their body
sometimes it's hard to tell there is
several grades if you have a grade three
or grade four test varicocele it has
what's called a bag of worms appearance
so think about if you've just resistance
trained or it's a really hot day or
you're wearing very tight fitting
clothing then if you feel it and almost
feels like there's worms in the scrotum
the other way is to do a scary visual
yeah bag of worms yeah well just that
yeah anyway I think parasites when I
hear that but that's not what you're
referring to you're talking about just
the the uh the texture the best way for
most people to check is to valsalva for
a long period of time when you have El
Salva Venus return uh will decrease can
you explain valsalva for people it's
bearing down like you're lifting a
weight or having a bowel movement
where you uh swallow and all a lot of
times you can almost see
um buildup of uh blood in your like
jugular veins as well so you have increa
decreased blood return to the heart and
it increased
um blood in the veins themselves I'd
like to take a brief break and thank our
sponsor inside tracker inside tracker is
a personalized nutrition platform that
analyzes data from your blood and DNA to
help you better understand your body and
help you reach your health goals I've
long been a believer in getting regular
blood work done for the simple reason
that many of the factors that impact
your immediate and long-term Health can
only be analyzed from a quality blood
test the problem with a lot of blood and
DNA tests out there however is that you
get data back about metabolic factors
lipids and hormones and so forth but you
don't know what to do with those data
inside tracker solves that problem and
makes it very easy for you to understand
what sorts of nutritional behavioral
maybe even supplementation based
interventions you might want to take on
in order to adjust the numbers of those
metabolic factors hormones lipids and
other things that impact your immediate
and long-term Health to bring those
numbers into the ranges that are
appropriate and indeed optimal for you
if you'd like to try inside tracker you
can visit insidetracker.com huberman and
get 20 off any of inside trackers plans
that's inside tracker.com huberman to
get twenty percent off okay so vitamin
D3 I'm guessing you're talking about
vitamin D3 specifically when you say
vitamin D
um and then Boron 5 to 12 milligrams per
day all right um and then what are some
of the other things to optimize uh
testosterone that are in supplement form
we can talk about things that affect the
sterotogenesis Cascade so we could touch
on Tong catali I know we've talked about
that a little bit before so but I'm
guessing a number of people probably
haven't heard that conversation also
known as long Jack and that up regulates
several different enzymes in the
steroidogenesis Cascade and by that what
you mean if and this is another good
thing to Google I think anybody
interested in hormone optimization
should understand where where sterol
hormones come from they come usually
from cholesterol and they can be shunted
off to vitamin D very easily they can be
shunted off to testosterone or estrogens
or progestogens quite easily as well
but tonkat helps with the conversion of
multiple key steps where you synthesize
testosterone
another
um if you think of it as like a coenzyme
or a cofactor an up regulator of these
steps is insulin and igf-1
so A good rule of thumb is if you are
not expecting as much growth hormone
insulin and igf-1 for example lower carb
diets caloric deficits you're trying to
cut body fat or body weight then tonkat
is going to be theoretically especially
powerful
what sorts of dosages of Tonga do you
recommend to your patients anywhere from
300 to 1200 milligrams a day with tonkat
you need to be careful with the
standardization because and if you're
thinking about a general Tong cat
supplement which is by far the most well
studied then you're looking at the Yuri
comanone content which is a plant
compound that is likely the main active
pharmacologic effect so that's the
compound that's having the effect on the
body and if you standardize the Yuri
cominone very very high then
theoretically you're having more effect
at a lower dose
I take 400 milligrams of Tonga ali
um per day I take it early in the day
because it has a bit of a stimulant
effect and if I take it after 2 pm it
starts to inhibit my sleep
um I've been taking it for years
um and I rather like the the effects
that it seems subtle but you know
consistent I've never cycled it
um do you recommend cycling it I don't
see any reason to cycle it there is uh
there is a reason to cycle some
supplements but no reason to cycle Tonka
my blood work tells me that it causes an
increase in free testosterone for me and
also a slight increase in luteinizing
hormone for me
um what are some of the other effects on
various hormones that you've observed in
the blood work of your patients taking
Tonga Ali
tonkat can also slightly increase DHEA
and if you have a very high shpg again
that's the protein that binds up your
androgens and estrogens an extremely
important protein the higher your shbg
the more it helps decrease it so they've
studied tonkat in populations with very
normal shpgs and it does nothing for
shpg
interesting does that mean it does
nothing for somebody overall so if
somebody has shpg that's in the normal
range while taking Tonga benefit them in
any other way yes it'll increase their
total and free testosterone got it
um okay does it is it known to have
effects on anything else like thyroid
hormone growth hormone or is it purely
in these steroid synthesis Pathways or
steroid I should say synthesis and
receptor and modulation Pathways there's
no direct effect on those Pathways
however anytime you alter your free
Androgen or free estrogen
uh particularly one without altering the
other it will alter The Binding protein
that binds thyroid hormones so any
change you make whether it's natural
optimization or hormone replacement
you're going to slightly skew your
thyroid hormone profile one common like
actionable example of this that I see
often clinically is someone starts let's
say estrogen replacement or testosterone
replacement maybe they're taking AI with
their testosterone replacement aromatase
inhibitor
correct an aromatase inhibitor which
blocks the conversion to estrogen if
they're taking testosterone and they
have very little estrogen then you're
going to decrease The Binding protein
also known as thyroxine binding globulin
which binds active thyroid hormones so
if you start uh
trt and you either have low aromatase
activity or no aromatase activity no
conversion to estrogen then your free
thyroid hormones will go up even just
acutely usually feedback inhibition
which is how the body talks to itself
and says you know we need to make more
of this or less of this but acutely
there's not always enough time you're
going to have very high thyroid hormones
and you can have tachycardia which is a
fast heart rate or you can feel kind of
like overly fight or flight due to
increased thyroid hormone activity in
the in tissue
okay so Tonga Ali this is a broad range
300 to 1200 milligrams per day and I
realized that the source matters there
um what are some of the other hormones
that you uh prescribe to your patients
who do not want to go on testosterone
replacement therapy or take exogenous
DHEA or anything like that
we could talk about fedosia next fedosia
is interesting because it's a genus of
plants vedosia agrestis is one of them
there's many others that are very
interesting that species is likely the
most well studied and it will increase
LH so um I would not consider it an LH
memetic so it doesn't really mimic it
but it increases the release of
luteinizing hormone from the pituitary
that's a hormone that binds to the latex
cell to the LH receptor kind of like HCG
does
and it will increase the release of
testosterone I see so I think for people
that aren't familiar with HCG so human
chorionic gonadotropin is basically
synthetic luteinizing hormone and
luteinizing hormone is the hormone
released from the pituitary that is
going to travel down to the testes to
stimulate the production of sperm and
testosterone but mainly testosterone is
that correct
um mostly correct technically synthetic
LH is also known as little rlh or
recombinant LH and HCG can be synthetic
but often it is just refined from the
urine of pregnant ladies since the
um since the placenta makes it that's
why it's called chorionic gonadotropin
so where are they getting all this
pregnant women's urine I mean I mean
there's there a location not that I want
to go donations yeah really so there are
women trimester pregnant ladies it's
very high donating their urine and then
they're purifying it and then men are
injecting it yes wow and that's actually
the same for menopausal ladies so first
trimester pregnant ladies that's how you
can make
um you know non-synthetic HCG
and then for minotropins which are also
known there's a couple of different
names for it like minnowpure you have
menopausal ladies that have very high LH
and FSH and then you refine the FSH and
LH okay so
um moving away from the sources and from
urine uh fedogia agrestis what dosages
uh do you have patients take I've heard
of uh some potential toxicity to the
testicular cells there is one study and
this is a rat study but you can equate
the dose of toxicity in rats and humans
they did not give these rats any
antioxidants but it increases a couple
different
um like pro-inflammatory markers one is
ggt or gamma glutamyl transferase comes
from both the testes and the liver and
one is alkaline phosphatase also known
as elk Foss again coming from both areas
there are several different ways that
you can attenuate this increase and you
can also just check to see if you have
increased in the rat dose that equates
with humans that had no effect so the
safe dose was an average of 300
milligrams a day so that would be 300
milligrams a day in humans is the dosage
that did not have toxicity correct
correct and often even if there is
toxicity in rats there is not toxicity
humans so it's not directly Equitable
but to be safe another regimen that I
have people take is 600 milligrams every
other day or 600 milligrams three times
a week often Monday Wednesday Friday
this is very interesting and relevant
because I I've been taking fidogio for
some period of time all my markers and
and tests into indicate that there's no
toxicity but I've been taking 600
milligrams per day but I've been cycling
it for about eight to twelve weeks on
and then a few weeks off but based on
what you're saying I'm thinking maybe
three times per week or or every other
day might be better is that right if you
weren't going to get any labs that is
certainly the regimen that you want if
you're going to check your ggt and Elk
Foss or even take other things to
prevent those from increasing then you
can certainly be more aggressive with
your fedocia dosing you can increase it
quite a bit and it has a dose dependent
response in both the activities
associated with high testosterone and
also just LH and testosterone
so the on a more aggressive regimen
would be 600 milligrams daily for a
month and then take one to two weeks off
great I think that's more or less what
I've been doing
um okay terrific in terms of other
hormones what are some of the
supplements that can support growth
hormone right a hormone that's
associated with tissue repair and in
some cases metabolism and fat loss
um what are some of the tools
nutritional and or supplement based one
can do to tap on the growth hormone
pathway and endless lump igf-1 in there
too since they're essentially working
along the same dimensions a quick
synopsis growth hormone is a peptide
hormone and it is released by the
pituitary
there's growth hormone releasing hormone
and ghrelin that stimulate the release
so there's also peptides that are very
analogous to these two things
you have that pulsatile secretion of
growth hormone in a very fast half-life
of just minutes and then it increases
igf-1 there is both peripheral igf-1 and
Central igf-1 and igf2 but no need to
get into the specifics
there is a happy medium to where your
growth hormone is at a adequate level
and your igf-1 is an adequate level
usually those two are congruent so in
most cases we just check an igf-1 and
occasionally The Binding peptides for
igf-1 kind of like shbg that we talked
about earlier but you're estimating a
free igf-1
it's it's kind of confusing because all
hormone almost all hormones have binding
proteins to help regulate them but often
you want to look at free testosterone
free estradiol free igf-1 or at least
estimate it free cortisol even and free
thyroid hormone
but um when you're talking about uh
growth hormone and igf-1 usually you
don't need to do anything to optimize it
if you are diabetic
then depending on the type of Diabetes
your igf-1 and growth hormone can be too
high
specifically in type 1 diabetes your
growth hormone is extremely high but
your igf-1 is low
so if you're in a dysregulated state or
have pathology I would just talk to your
doctor about igf-1 or growth hormone
taking thing taking amino acids before
you go to bed could potentially help
with growth hormone release just because
most growth hormone is released while
you sleep
I've heard that fasting can increase
growth hormone and I know there are
certain patterns of weight training that
can increase growth hormone some of
those regimens in the weight room that
increase growth hormone have been
covered by Dr Duncan French who is A on
a guest on this podcast but so maybe
we'll refer people to that episode for
the specific protocols these high volume
training during those training exercises
it usually does it transiently for a
period of a few hours and it a lot of
this igf-1 is released by the muscle
itself so it's not necessarily released
by the liver igf-1 that is released
directly due to growth hormone signaling
usually the growth hormone comes from
the pituitary and binds to the liver
where it usually has a half-life of
About a Week where the paracrine or
autocone think of it as like the
peripherally acting or acting in the
muscles itself which is also helpful
is released and is not as concerning
because guess it's not related to
insulin resistance but it is related to
the training itself
so fasting and growth hormone
um is it true that fasting can increase
growth hormone and maybe as a little
related tangent I've heard that limiting
food intake for the two hours before
going to sleep can increase the pulse of
growth hormone that one experiences
during sleep of course everyone gets a
pulse of growth hormone during sleep but
especially carbohydrate-laden meals can
blunt that Peak that occurs during sleep
quite substantially so two questions
does avoiding food intake in the two
hours prior to sleep help increase
growth hormone release maybe it's being
overly neurotic maybe people need to
avoid food in the four hours before
sleep but regardless what is the
relationship between fasting and growth
hormone release I find this really
interesting fasting certainly potently
increases growth hormone release however
the end binding to the receptor
is less sensitive so although fasting
does increase growth hormone
the genes that are Downstream to it both
the growth hormone genes and igf-1
related Gene transcription activity will
not be significantly higher however if
you are optimizing the growth hormone
that is released as pulsatile secretion
it is helpful to avoid eating for two
hours so the general rule of thumb is
avoid eating about two hours before bed
I think that's clinically significant
and helpful but fasting otherwise
specifically for growth hormone
optimization in someone who already has
normal growth hormone signaling is not
helpful
extremely useful to hear because the one
of the major reasons why people fast is
to get that growth hormone increase but
if they're adjusting things on the back
end that negate that well then no such
luck not that I have anything against
fasting I do a pseudo intermittent
fasting mostly because I prefer to eat
at fairly regular times of day
okay so it doesn't sound like there's a
lot that people can take in supplement
form to improve growth hormone what
about thyroid hormone what are some of
the things that people can take or do in
order to make sure that their thyroid
hormone levels are appropriate
you want to have a balance of iodine and
you want to have a good source of iodine
so there's some camps that say you
should use a huge high dose of iodine
and there's protocols for it and there's
some that say you should use just barely
enough iodine I believe it's like 200
micrograms per day
but you want to balance one of the
things that I see that many people do
not talk about when it comes to iodine
and thyroid
is there's compounds known as
goiterogens or goitrogens and these
goitrogens are neither good nor evil but
they're actually kind of a nice check
and balance
you need more iodine if you consume more
goitrogens and some examples of these
are some of my favorite foods
cruciferous vegetables Boron is also a
goitrogen so higher goitrogens higher
iodine
so ingesting iodine containing salt is
useful yes or no
iodized salt does prevent goiter but it
is not necessarily the ideal form of
iodine good forms of iodine often come
from the ocean if you look at a chart of
hypothyroidism there is a tendency to
have more hypothyroidism the more Inland
you go
so trying to eat some cruciferous
vegetables each day would be the best
way to improve thyroid hormone along
with plenty of iodine you don't want too
much iodide signaling many people are
familiar with radioactive iodine tablets
and that's basically an extremely high
amount of iodine to block out the
um like the radioactive iodine that
comes from after you know like a nuclear
meltdown or whatnot
so we've got creatine bidding
L-Carnitine
with Allison garlic to offset the tmao
vitamin D3 Boron Tonga Ali fedogia some
fasting
love to talk to you about peptides so I
can imagine a hierarchy hierarchy starts
with Behaviors new and nutrition
behaviors of course include training and
limiting stress and all the things we
talked about before
Sunshine Etc and
optimize nutrition
then we talked about supplements all the
things we just listed off to optimize
testosterone and we can get into this
but estrogen as well which is important
for libido and brain function and tissue
function and Joints feeling good Etc
but then we get into the realm where one
might or could consider exogenous
hormones get taking a small dose of
testosterone or taking a small dose of
of GH even if you know if that were
appropriate and certainly only working
with the doctor but in between there's a
step of so-called peptides and of course
there are many peptides we've already
talked about some of them but when
people talk about taking peptides the
ones that I hear most often about is a
category that
increases GH and igf-1 and those to my
knowledge go by the things like sir
moral and uh hyper Moreland Tessa
morellen sort of a kit of things that um
taken separately or in combination to
increase GH and igf-1 but then other
people for instance are taking peptides
uh like bpc157 to try and uh improve
tissue healing and Recovery there's a
lot of interest in peptides please if
you would tell us about what you know
about the safety of peptides in terms of
their sourcing and the utility of
peptides you know is this something that
people should consider before thinking
about hormone replacement should people
be wary of these things I am very wary
of particular sources that are sold
online that are not clean they contain
contaminants and it could be dangerous I
really would love your thoughts on
peptides so I'm just going to sit back
and let you Riff on peptides but if you
could touch on some of the ones that I
mentioned I'd be most grateful
a peptide is just a chain of amino acids
between two and a couple hundred in
length so I think of peptides as several
different categories and the ghrps that
you mentioned I would consider those and
that stands for growth hormone releasing
peptide you have two main types The
ghrelin Agonist that or they hit the
ghrelin receptor and though it helps
release growth hormone because of that
and then also the ghrh like peptides so
they're very similar to growth hormone
releasing hormone often they just change
a couple amino acids and it acts like
that Tessa morelin is one of them sir
Morlin is another one and CJC is another
common one I believe those are all in
the class of ghrh like peptides whereas
hypomerellen or ibutamorin which is also
known as mk677 those two are in the
class of ghrelin agonists so they're
more like they hit the receptor that
ghrelin does whereas the other ones hit
the ghrh receptor I think if ghrelin is
making me hungry hungry and angry why
would I want to take something that
would increase ghrelin signaling
some people are trying to gain weight it
also does increase your growth hormone
so if your growth hormone is very low
you can consider it ibutamorin is a long
acting so it has a long Half-Life also
known as mk677 it was well it was
studied mostly in growth hormone
deficiency
and do these people get angry also
they can many people report a side
effect of anxiety or significant hunger
most people take it in the evening so
they don't notice that hunger as much it
can also greatly increase your blood
glucose so if you're insulin resistant
or pre-diabetic gets especially
concerning
this is one of those rare moments where
I hear something and I that and I think
okay even though there's this uh kit of
compounds that can increase GH and igf-1
based on everything you're telling me
maybe just taking GH is the better
option for those people because growth
hormone at least it's synthetic growth
hormone is mimicking an endogenous
hormone I mean certainly not taking
anything it might be the ideal but for
those that want to increase growth
hormone and they want to use
pharmacology to do that sounds like
these peptides are pretty
curious
yeah it kind of depends on the situation
if there's a an individual that
struggles with hunger and not eating
enough for example
um you know someone who has a very small
stomach or they just have a very low
hunger Drive sometimes you want more of
that rexigenic signaling the
hypothalamus you have anorexogenic
signaling which is kind of like anorexia
and orexogenic signaling which is I call
it the hangry center of the hypothalamus
or the hangry Center and if there's an
imbalance between those two then perhaps
it'd be helpful it potentially
theoretically helpful in anorexics of
which the incidence of anorexia and Men
is increasing significantly as you're
telling me this I'm remembering being 14
or 15 years old and I would go into the
kitchen sometimes and I was so hungry I
would just obliterate all the food and I
do remember being I've always been
pretty high energy guy but having an
immense amount of energy I don't can't
recall if it was a hangry feeling or not
but I'm guessing that was growth hormone
I grew one foot in a single Academic
Year so imagine that was at least in
part due to growth hormone
um in any case um summerellen is is the
peptide that I hear most often about
um I admittedly tried a run of it I was
researching a book and decided to take
it before sleep on an empty stomach it
gave me a tremendous depth of sleep but
that sleep was really truncated which is
this nerd speak for saying deep but
short sleep I would wake up after very
intense dreams I can't say that it
helped me recover from exercise that
much I didn't notice any additional fat
loss loss or anything sort of abandon it
except for occasional use again this was
prescribed by a doctor
um you know I I was trying to get the
sense of these these peptides and their
effects are somewhat vague and
distributed and highly individual is
that a fair way to describe them
part of the problem with the effect of
peptides is many people take them in
levels that are far above the
physiologic range
even individuals who are checking their
igf-1 while they take these different
ghrps most of them do not check the
binding peptides for example igf binding
peptide one two or three and their Free
igf-1 level might be significantly
different
so the uh common doses that people will
take these off label for as a supplement
are often much greater than the
therapeutic or physiologic range which
for me just underscores the fact that
it's pretty precarious I mean I'm not
coming in here as the referee of what
anyone should or shouldn't do
um just trying to gather and distribute
information but I've heard for instance
that some of companies where people can
acquire these things without
prescription they those companies are
not good at cleaning out the uh the
Lippy polysaccharide the LPS which can
cause an inflammatory response in other
words these are dirty compounds
um and that just sounds risky it just
sounds frankly it just sounds really
dangerous to me LPS is a common additive
in many companies that are not
pharmacies but they're selling things
that people often use as human
consumption one interesting note about
lipopolysaccharide is your gut
microbiome actually makes a lot of it as
well especially prevatella which is a
specific species that can have to do
with your Baseline body temperature
so your Baseline body temperature might
also change depending on if you're on a
peptide that has LPS in it yikes yikes
and yikes but I tend to be pretty
conservative
um when it comes to taking anything
exogenous but I do rely on many of the
supplements that we talked about earlier
and I do try and optimize the behavioral
things and nutritional things after a
long time okay so then
um leaving peptides behind
um we are now I suppose in the territory
of exogenous hormone so let's say that
somebody decides
they're not concerned with fertility or
they're going to bank sperm or they
already have kids or they're going to
defer on this issue of wanting to have
kids my understanding is that nowadays A
lot of people are using testosterone
let's not even call it replacement
therapy because some of these people
have 600 700 or even you know 800
nanogram per deciliter read so they're
not replacing anything that is
diminished they're just trying to
augment what's already there increase
what's already there my understanding is
that taking a low dose more frequently
is going to be more beneficial than the
kind of old school way of giving you
know 100 or even 200 milligrams in a
single injection once every two weeks is
that right and what do you do with your
patients so let me give you a
hypothetical somebody comes into your
office there
um do their blood work and they have
um blood levels of let's say 600
nanograms per deciliter testosterone
their estrogen is also in normal range
everything else checks out but they're
complaining of you know slightly
diminished libido slightly poor recovery
from workouts maybe
um you know reduce motivation and drive
although no major depression and you
come to the conclusion that testosterone
therapy not replacement but testosterone
therapy might be a good option to
explore what's a typical dosage of range
and frequency of administration range
that you might consider exploring
and some of this depends on the shbg and
free testosterone as well so if that
same individual had a very high shbg
which again is The Binding protein that
binds up the testosterone and all
androgens and estrogens if it is
extremely high and they have a free
testosterone of two then they might need
a different dose because they need
enough testosterone in order to have a
normal eugenatal free testosterone but a
general normal dosing range especially
for someone starting is around 100 to
120 milligrams divided over the course
of a week usually either every other day
or three times a week occasionally twice
a week many people with shbg a bit
higher can get away pretty easily with
twice a week this is assuming that the
Ester is cypionate or enanthate so 260
milligram injections of testosterone
cypionate per week yeah very common
dosing to hit that 120 milligrams per
week as kind of the typical average
correct and I would consider this a like
a physio logic you can adult dose for
many people even 200 milligrams a week
is far above the reference range all of
this is said with the caveat that
testosterone is normally released in a
pulsatile manner so it's high in the
morning low in the evening whereas if
you're on a testosterone therapy then
you're going to have a steady state so
your testosterone level is going to be
pretty much the same even in the evening
and
in your experience when patients do that
they I'm guessing they report the normal
constellation of positive effects you
know improved mood improved energy
improve sleep recovery Etc what are some
of the hazards or things that can crop
up in blood work or just subjectively
that um can be warning signs that even a
dosage of 120 milligrams divided into
these two or three dosages per week is
too high
every organ system in the body so this
is when you really have to be uh at
least well versed in every organ system
not just the gonadal
um like you know genital system you need
to have uh you know Dermatology prowess
acne is very common change lots of
different skin pathologies or even
bruising can be related to hormone
replacement
hair loss is very common to see as well
mental status changes it could
occasionally it even induces a manic or
a bipolar episode because testosterone
is also dopaminergic and then
cardiovascularly not just in the heart
but also concerns for like microvascular
ischemic disease ferritin buildup
because the estrogen also increases and
then fertility concerns as well and
lipid concerns too so you really have to
be you know hematologist dermatologist
cardiologist
a lipidologist the whole nine yards so
another reason or set of reasons rather
to uh if one is considering using
testosterone therapy to really do this
in close communication with a really
good physician because that's a lot to
monitor knowing whether or not you have
acne or not is one thing but knowing
whether or not your LDL is going up your
apob is going up that's a whole other
business and that needs to be done
through blood work is what I'm hearing
correct and if your physician that is
managing or prescribing your
testosterone therapy or your HRT is not
well versed in these systems you would
want him or her to be part of an
interdisciplinary team where they have
other experts that can monitor those
systems
I skipped over a sort of still
intermediate set of things prescription
drugs but maybe talking about
testosterone first was a bit of a
mistake on my part because I'm aware
that there actually I think they're
companies but certainly groups out there
that say no wait don't go straight from
nothing to supplements to testosterone
once you're doing uh behaviors and
optimizing nutrition supplements let's
forget peptides instead of going
straight to testosterone therapy one
idea that many people are pursuing is to
take the prescription drugs that trigger
luteinizing hormones so take Taking HCG
human chorionic gonadotropin
which my understanding is will increase
testosterone but also estrogen or
they'll take things like clomiphen in
fact I think there are a bunch of
companies out there now that are I'm
saying don't take testosterone it shuts
down spermatogenesis shuts down uh
testosterone production clomophin is the
way to go
um maybe you could educate us about the
HCG monotherapy I think it's called
where you're just mono one just taking
HCG and clomiphen as a um and or
clomiphen as a tool to ratchet up
hormones
so quick points on HCG human choriana
can atropin made during especially the
first trimester of pregnancy it has
effects other than binding to the LH
receptor it also binds to the TSH
receptor in the thyroid it's thyroid
stimulating hormone yes in fact if you
look at a molecule of HCG and thyroid
stimulating hormone they are extremely
similar
however you need a relatively high dose
of HCG to bind to the TSH receptor this
is the normal mechanism in pregnancy
that accounts for the increased need of
thyroid hormone usually about 30 to 40
percent so that's why if someone has
hypothyroidism you need to increase
their dose of thyroid because the HCG is
not going to be doing it for you
um the Clomid or clomiphen there's two
main uh I believe it's Di stereoisomers
and one of them is in clomiphen one of
them is Zoo clomiphon
and these two work slightly differently
in Plymouth and I believe has a faster
Half-Life and it is uh potentially
slightly better tolerated however they
were studying it
um you know Clomid is a very commonly
prescribed drug and obviously there is
plenty of income within in uh Clomid
however the drug which was androzole and
Dro xal did not go all the way through
the FDA approval process despite Clomid
being FDA approved okay so there's
Clomid which contains clomiphin but
they're also because we're talking about
men male hormone optimization this
episode there are males out there who
want to increase their testosterone and
other hormones maybe growth hormone Etc
who opt to not take exogenous
testosterone so no cream no pellet no no
um pill no injectable cypionate but
decide to take clomiphen a couple times
a week
my understanding I've never done this I
would say if I had my understanding is
that
taking clomiphen maybe 250 milligram
tablets a week is what I hear people are
doing will increase what luteinizing
hormone
the various estrogen receptor subunits
could you explain how clomiphin would
benefit anyone and is this a good
strategy I'm hearing that it's being
done quite a lot now it will increase
testosterone in a dose-dependent manner
but it has many other pharmacodynamic
effects which is the effect of the drug
on the body other than its effect on the
hypothalamus and the pituitary so in the
hypothalamus and the pituitary
it does what's called negative feedback
inhibition
um or it it blocks the oxygen of
estrogen so it crowds out estrogen from
the estrogen receptor on the
hypothalamus in the pituitary and what's
the subjective effect that that would
cause so my understanding and experience
of estrogen is that if I ever took and I
did take a very low dose of an aromatase
inhibitor once and I felt terrible it
actually reduced libido joints felt achy
that's when I discovered that wow
estrogen is actually really important
for your brain function for joint
function and for libido and suppressing
estrogen for me it turned just turned
out to be the the wrong idea but my
levels indicate that it's within
reference range okay so why would I want
to take something that would increase
the activity of an estrogen receptor I
just can't find the rationale for that
the main rationale behind taking a serm
is as a very temporary measure that is
not going to suppress pituitary or
hypothalamic function if your
testosterone is just so drastically low
that it is unlikely to recover anyone
anyway anyway so most of the time it is
not clinically useful and serum should
not be prescribed very often certainly
not as long-term testosterone
replacement or testosterone optimization
in most individuals there's always
exceptions to everything but there's
five different estrogen and estrogen
related receptors there's two main
estrogen receptors in Clomid and every
serm has a very unique profile because
they selectively inhibit some receptors
in some tissues but not other receptors
and other tissues for example Clomid can
inhibit receptors that are in the eye
and it can cause visual changes blurry
vision
especially at higher doses
and it also acts in every other tissue
of the body so side effects from Clomid
and other selective estrogen receptor
modifiers are very common
so I'm at least by my mind I'm going to
pool them with peptides and say it
sounds precarious and probably not ideal
for most people
um going back to testosterone therapy
then I get to notice folks I've deleted
the replacement part because
I think so many people are using
testosterone therapy without the need to
the sort of reference range need to
um to replace anything but rather
building on what they already have for
purposes of increasing Vitality Etc
going back to that my understanding is
that taking HCG uh several times per
week can help maintain spermatogenesis
and fertility even while people are on
testosterone but and you and I were
talking about this earlier that there's
tremendous variation some people will
take a small amount of testosterone and
just Crush their sperm count they just
won't make any viable sperm other people
can maintain viable sperm production
while on testosterone especially if
they're taking HCG is that right correct
and there's many reasons for this some
of this has to do with heat damage to
the testes so potentially cold therapy
could be helpful for that
um and Ice baths cold showers you know
or just and certainly avoiding
yeah yeah stopping the daily hot tub can
restore fertility in many people I know
a number of people that are trying to
conceive children that go into the sauna
and they'll just put a cold pack in
their shorts or between their legs
depending on whether or not they're
wearing shorts or not when they go in
um or they'll alternate ice and heat in
a way that maintains coolness of the the
the
milieu in which the the sperm live in
other words
um they're cooling
um their scrotum deliberately in order
to avoid killing the sperm actually I
saw an interesting paper uh that said
that for every two degree increase in
um uh temperature uh of the scrotum
there's a 20 decrease in in
spermatogenesis and and viability of
sperm and that actually if you look at
the difference between people who stand
a lot sit a lot and drive a lot what you
see is a progressive decrease in sperm
count because when people are sitting
there's an increase in temperature and
then when they're sitting on the hot
seat of the car there's an um or using
the heated seats actually kills sperm I
think they're good data on that yeah
excellent data and anecdotally you see
it as well I've had several patients
come in for fertility consultations and
all we do is like you know no
medications no supplements we change
their like several lifestyle things a
tight fitted very tight fitting clothing
is another one and soon they have
fertility and um they're no longer they
they have sperm whereas before they did
not interesting
um I'd like to talk about some of the
do's and don'ts but we have talked about
a lot of do's things that one can do to
optimize hormones maybe we could just do
sort of um more rapid fire uh q a on
some of the don'ts
um and maybe throw in some science where
you feel uh it's appropriate
um cannabis marijuana THC yes or no it
diminishes testosterone levels
smoked cannabis I would say diminishes
testosterone increases prolactin that's
a no other cannabinoids not particularly
harmful so CBD
CBD not particularly harmful smoked CBD
I'm not sure what about edible cannabis
and THC as far as I know edible cannabis
and THC does not significantly increase
prolactin to a point where it would be
disruptive of hormones can marijuana THC
cannabis whatever you want to call it
increase gynecomastia the growth of male
breast tissue yes it certainly can and
there's a pretty good association
between smoked THC and gynecomastia
what about uh nicotine and testosterone
and estrogen and other hormones smoked
nicotine
nicotine is particularly concerning not
only for testosterone but also for
estrogen part of it is if you're talking
about nicotine from tobacco there's many
other carcinogens in it especially if
it's smoked but nicotine even if it is
chewed in a dose-dependent manner so if
you can use an extremely small amount of
nicotine then it's not as concerned in
the long run but it's a vasoconstructor
and one of the main concerns with it
would be cardiovascular disease or even
microvascular ischemic disease that can
lead to neurodegenerative disease so
like a type of dementia that can be
partly due to nicotine if you use
nicotine for a very long period of time
especially at a higher dose it's a
dose-dependent effect
on your hormone profile is that also
true for Nicorette and nicotine other
nicotine gums at high doses if you can
use an extremely low dose of a nicotine
gum then theoretically that would be
um you know maintainable it's not going
to overload the nicotinic receptor you
have acetylcholine and the cholinergic
system as one of your you know main
nervous systems of course and you have
muscarinic receptors and nicotine
receptors and there's just better ways
to optimize your nicotinic receptor
activity for example acetylcholine
precursors like Alpha GPC
phosphatidylserine phosphatidylcholine
uh weak acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors
especially natural ones potentially have
a um like a part as well and then other
alkaloids so nicotine is an alkaloid
from the tobacco plant there's other
plants like cytosine and the um that
genus of plants and that alkaloid is
also a nicotine receptor Agonist
um is it true that
cycling for too long literally bicycling
sitting on a bike seat too long can
damage the prostate yes it can be very
concerning especially if you're seated
while cycling especially if you're
putting a lot of pressure on the
perineum your core is kind of like a box
where your diaphragm sort of makes the
top and your abs and serratus make the
front and the sides your back muscles
make the back and then your pelvic floor
makes the bottom of the box which is
arguably the most important part of your
core and that pressure can weaken and
even lead to incontinence and impotence
so we were talking earlier today in the
gym about how
um heavy legwork hack squats deadlifts
those kinds of things a lot of guys are
doing to increase their testosterone
done correctly can actually augment and
build up the strength of the pelvic
floor done incorrectly can actually
weaken the pelvic floor and lead to all
sorts of issues including sexual effects
negative sexual effects so
um how does one go about learning
whether or not their movements are being
done properly to support pelvic floor or
to destruct pelvic floor
uh the pelvic floor is a constellation
of muscles just like any other kind of
like system in the body and uh
you know form is important if you're
doing the valsalva maneuver which again
is that uh
kind of like bearing down or deep breath
where you feel all of your abs are tight
you can also notice that your pelvic
floor is tight as well
if you have a history of a an inguinal
hernia which is a whole kind of like
connecting the abdominal cavity down
through the pelvic floor or even the
scrotum in some cases and that can be a
sign that there is weakness in that area
and you might have to concentrate it on
it most or even have a physiotherapist
or a physical therapist specifically
Target the pelvic floor many exercises
in which you Val Salva or use your
glutes or legs you can learn to squeeze
them and have that mind muscle
Connection in order to help build up the
pelvic floor and there's other things
many people are familiar with kegels
that is just one of the many different
exercises that can help your pelvic
floor my understanding is that while
strengthening the pelvic floor is good
excessive contraction of the pelvic
floor can actually limit blood flow to
the pelvic area the penis and so forth
so this is again it's a double-edged
sword right I mean you don't want guys
out there to just start doing endless
number of key goals every day because
they're actually going to constrict
blood flow to that area right there's a
yeah and in fact the the erection
response is
parasympathetic it's a relaxed induced
response right correct so uh you know
for the the reason I chuckle is that you
know for because we're talking about
things we don't have visuals or charts
and and certainly um it's hard to know
whether or not a given exercise like
kegels are going to be good or not good
um if it's excessive what you know how
many sets and Reps uh does does it take
before it goes from from good to bad is
there a kind of general rule of thumb
for people to think about this I mean
clearly blood flow to that area is key
all right for sexual performance and yet
when one trains the legs or even walks
you're getting blood flow so my
understanding is this that a combination
of weight training to stimulate the
positive hormonal and muscular and
um connective tissue growth is key
provides not over training but so is
casual exercise like walking and
stretching and the sorts of things that
will then return blood flow to that area
is that it
an overly basic way to think about it or
will that suffice I think that's a good
way to think about it I think the main
point with kegels is they're just a one
of many different things so if you're
having some pelvic floor pathology
certainly or even just concerned about
your pelvic floor
don't just uh you know take the advice
do kegels and you'll be okay that is not
near enough it's just one of the many
aspects
um okay so going back to the rapid q a
and then we'll come back to this issue
of blood flow because there's some
interesting science and protocols there
the question I have is alcohol does it
increase aromatase the enzyme that
converts testosterone into estrogen or
not and is there a dose dependence there
it significantly does there is a dose
dependence in general I would not
recommend more than uh three to four you
know standard drinks uh one huge glass
of wine is probably five standard drinks
but um
I'd say every two weeks yeah that's
consistent with what um I discovered
researching alcohol an episode we did on
alcohol that no alcohol is definitely
better for all aspects of Health than
any alcohol and anyone that says that
well red wine contains these various
things well it doesn't contain enough of
those positive things to have a positive
effect but that if people do opt to
drink alcohol that two drinks per week
and meaning 20 grams of alcohol so
that's probably two 12 ounce beers or
two you know four ounce glasses of wine
is going to be the upper limit Beyond
which you're going to start seeing all
sorts of negative effects the other
thing to keep in mind with alcohol is as
a lot of calories seven kilocalories per
gram almost as much as fat which is nine
and then it's also very gabaergic so it
it can activate inhibitory
neurotransmission and that can also
affect how many how much LH and FSH is
released so that can also decrease
testosterone almost kind of uh similar
to how opiates can decrease testosterone
I feel very lucky that I don't enjoy
alcohol never really did you can kind of
take it or leave it
um certainly don't like sedatives like
valium or anything like that which as
you just mentioned can suppress
testosterone
um you said the word fat so
um I'm gonna pick up on that and say in
order to optimize hormone production is
it important to have some saturated fat
in one's diet
um and what happens on very low fat
diets to testosterone estrogen and other
steroid hormones
Fat's interesting because there's so
many different beneficial fats Omega-3s
almost every American gets plenty of
omega-6s in any developed country really
when it comes to saturated fat there is
more of a correlation with hormone
optimization if you're eating things
with saturated fat you tend to have
those are things with more you know fat
soluble vitamins and things that are
very nutrient dense otherwise but it is
not vital in general you want to
eliminate any trans fat unless it's
trans fat from the remnants there's
always an exception to everything right
so there is healthy trans omega-3 fats
which are formed in the stomach of like
grass-fed and finished ruminants
but ingesting mostly olive oils maybe
nut Butters in in limited amounts
because they're very calorie dense but
unless people are trying to increase
their calories in which case they're a
great source of calories
um
small amounts of butter ghee probably
okay but not excessive amounts is that
right yeah yes fat is perfectly fine
cholesterol has an interesting so
cholesterol and in general phospholipids
make the bilayer that's around the cell
but cholesterol is also a hormone in and
of itself because it binds to the
estrogen related receptor Alpha so I
consider that like in the estrogen
receptor category and they can help with
metabolism but also potentially have
concerns for cancer and tumor risk
I want to go back to the prostate and
talk to you about something that's kind
of a newer emerging Trend I know that um
you've talked a little bit about this in
uh previous podcasts that a number of
men or I should say a number of
Physicians are prescribing low-dose to
Dallas also known as Cialis to their
male patients so in dosage ranges of
like 2.5 milligrams to 5 milligrams per
day but not for erectile dysfunction but
rather for improving prostate health and
presumably they get sort of a boost in
terms of blood flow
um to the genitalia as well but again
not specifically a deal with erectile
dysfunction but to deal with prostate
health and blood flow to the prostate is
that something that you sometimes often
prescribe to your patients and of what
age
tadalafel is a very underrated
medication the age would kind of depend
on the indication
so tadalophil is also a blood pressure
medication it can very slightly decrease
blood pressure especially at higher
doses at higher doses it's a high dose
would be 20 milligrams not 2.5
milligrams but consistently it can
somewhat affect with the cones in the
eye that have to do with red and green
sight although if you remove it that
effect is reversed so basically if you
don't need really really good red green
discrimination you can take higher doses
but in general I recommend no higher
than 10 milligrams a day usually just
two or five milligrams
one uh other benefit or other use of
tadalafel is that it increases the
density of the Androgen receptor
similarly to L-Carnitine
so that's an interesting benefit another
benefit is that if you give it to people
with nocturia which is urinating at
night in general it will cut the
episodes in half so it could go from two
to one which can make a big difference
for your sleep which will secondarily
make a big difference for your growth
hormone and testosterone optimization
interesting so you said 2.5 to 5
milligrams per day is kind of typical
for these prostate enhancing effects yes
and you mentioned the potential side
effects on adjusting visual perception
as a vision scientist
um that rings in my mind but in terms of
red green color discrimination I'm
guessing unless you're going to be a
subject in one of the experiments in my
lab or you want to be a fighter pilot
chances are you can probably get away
with a little less red green color
discrimination correct it's not
considered clinically significant unless
someone is a commercial pilot right so
if someone's getting their like pilot
exam that's one of the things we look
for okay so commercial pilots aside you
might want to ask your doctor about low
dose to Dallas for sake of enhancing
prostate health certainly monitoring PSA
prostate specific antigen is important I
can give an anecdote there
um when I tried sir moral in one of the
surprising side effects that was not
welcome was a dramatic spike in my
prostate specific antigen no one could
explain to me why that would happen but
when I stopped taking sermorelin it went
back to normal so it's one reason I
avoid sir moral and at least frequent
use Marlin PSA should be kept what below
levels of you know somewhere between one
and four is considered healthy is that
right it depends on the age if there's a
20 year old likely between zero and one
if there's a 40 year old likely between
one and three and then if there's an 80
year old it would not be abnormal to
have a PSA of five and have that be well
within the reference range right another
thing we should mention about PSAs if
you do take a five Alpha reductase
inhibitor like finasteride or
dutasteride often these will cut your
PSA in half
so if you for example if you have a PSA
of six and you start finasteride or do
testeride and then you recheck it in six
months and it's 6.5 that is a huge
concern because that's actually doubled
I'm glad you brought this up because
um I almost overlooked the fact that I
get a lot of questions about drugs to
offset hair loss most of those drugs are
going to operate through the DHT system
the dihydro testosterone system for the
reasons we talked about before DHC
receptors being on the scalp and causing
beard growth on the face
is it the case that a number of people
taking things like Propecia and other
things to block the DHT or disrupt the
DHT pathway are going to experience
diminished sex drive diminished
um you know kind of motivation and
general Vigor and if so are there
Alternatives like topical DHT
antagonists that they might use if they
want to keep their hair but not have
those negative effects
the way that I think about hair loss is
you have your fertilizers and also known
as growth Agonist and then you have your
anti-androgens whether they're systemic
or topical there is both but that's the
general Layman's way to think about hair
loss if you're only putting fertilizer
in your hair but you have androgenic
alopecia or male pattern baldness then
those hairs will still miniaturize and
eventually you'll still have loss such a
great word miniature rise yeah yeah it's
enough to send anybody off to find a
therapeutic right and by the way it's
difficult to tell if miniaturization is
happening unless you have a magnifying
glass
for a second there I didn't know whether
or not you were making a joke you're
talking about miniaturization of the
hair follicle correct yeah so what can
reverse that miniaturization that's just
a fun word to say I'm gonna just keep
saying it each individual has
um again we mentioned the Androgen
receptor males only have one Androgen
receptor genus on their X chromosome so
depending on how sensitive that Androgen
receptor is and depending on the density
of The receptors in the hair follicle
you can have a arbitrary threshold and
you don't know what this threshold is
until you start to have miniaturization
and loss of hair
but over the threshold the follicle will
die and eventually the stem cell will
leave but under the threshold you're
okay
every Androgen binds to the same
Androgen receptor so there is nothing
special about DHT DHT is just a stronger
Androgen so the higher your shbg things
that increase shbg are beneficial for
hair loss prevention because you have
less binding of that receptor so if you
think about hair loss specifically
androgenic or male pattern baldness in
the terms of
that Androgen receptor and everything in
general binding to it not just DHT but
also testosterone it's helpful it's just
that DHT is a huge battering ram whereas
the other androgens are just light
presses on the door got it so are some
of the topical DHT receptor antagonists
going to be a better choice for people
that want to maintain or their hair grow
more hair
um if they want to avoid side effects
likely so some individuals benefit from
systemic a systemic decrease in DHT for
a couple reasons one could be prostate
and then one could actually be
hypertrophy of The myocardium so DHT
also disproportionately thickens The
ventricle so for someone on trt that
might be a benefit that is prone to
thickening of the ventricle at Baseline
however many people that have just a bit
of predisposition they can use things
that are topical anti-androgens
Ketoconazole is one of them caffeine is
actually another one wait drinking
caffeine topical caffeine oh I was gonna
say my hair tends to go pretty fast so
it might be but I drink a lot of
caffeine so topical caffeine really
rubbing coffee on their head or or
taking caffeine tablets and how does it
wait you have to explain how this works
how do people get caffeine into the hair
follicle
um topically the caffeine enters the
scalp and crowds out like somewhat
crowds out the Androgen it is a weak
effect it's likely just strong enough to
be clinically significant usually
caffeine is put into formulations with
other things like Ketoconazole that are
also weak anti-androgens of notes
bronolactone can be prescribed topically
but is it is absorbed systemically
because the size of the molecule so
unless your doctor specifically
prescribes that for you especially as a
male do not use topical spironolactone
topical finasteride is also a smaller
molecule so it is also systemically
absorbed but it is not extremely well
systemically absorbed if you take
topical finasteride then usually your
systemic DHT will decrease by about 30
percent
topical dutasteride is likely a tiny bit
systemically absorbed but it's Unique
because its Half-Life is much faster at
a lower dose so topical dutasteride will
not affect your systemic DHT at all and
I've seen this anecdotally on many
people on topical dutasteride therapy
we're going to have to get you back on
here do an episode all about DHT and
hair loss and hair growth is you know
again not a topic that I focus on a lot
for myself but that I get a lot of
questions about for men and women one
thing that we could mention I got a ton
of questions about turmeric and
curcuminoids after last episode oh yeah
but I had reported my own anecdotal
experience that taking turmeric really
crushed my DHT levels and I did not feel
good I mean it crushed all sorts of uh
positive feelings of Vitality the moment
I stopped taking turmeric felt great
again many people report this and the
interesting thing about turmeric is most
of its beneficial action not all of it
some people benefit from systemic uh
turmeric and some people that can
tolerate it well it's actually great for
the prostate but most of the action it
does not need to be bioavailable it acts
on the gut microbiome
so you can take turmeric and if it is
not absorbed some turmeric is put in
special formulations like micellar or
liposomal or complex but a lot of it is
put with black pepper fruit extract
which is also known as biopurine which
is actually also a five Alpha reductase
inhibitor and it affects liver
cytochromes and so many supplement
companies put this black pepper fruit
extract bio purine in almost everything
so some people are on really high doses
and that could also be making most of
the effect of people who do not tolerate
turmeric well yeah I avoid turmeric like
the plague based on that one previous
experience because it was clearly
turmeric that caused the effect the
negative effect coming off it everything
reversed rapidly and the bio purine the
black pepper extract I also avoid that
like the plague based on everything you
just said I I want my five Alpha
reductions I want my DHT to be optimized
simply because my understanding is DHT
is the more powerful Androgen and it's
the one that yes it causes a little bit
of hair loss and I've got a few you know
patches here and there but I'm willing
to live with that
um based on all the other wonderful
things that DHT optimization does I'll
quickly mention a few other things one
saw palmetto is also a five Alpha
reduction inhibitor but only a couple of
the iso enzymes there's three main ISO
enzymes and a lot of the problem is that
you're inhibiting a couple of the iso
enzymes but not the other one
finasteride inhibits one and two do test
right actually inhibits all three
and finasteride inhibits the iso enzyme
that is in genital skin but not in the
skin throughout the rest of your body so
a lot of the side effects of finasteride
which is loss of sensation and loss of
erectile function have to do with the
um disc concordance between the
sensitivity of the genital skin and the
skin again another reason to not disrupt
5-alpha reductase and we'll definitely
get you back on here to talk about D I
think we should just do a whole episode
about DHT because so often when people
are thinking about optimizing hormones
especially male males trying to optimize
their hormones they're thinking
testosterone testosterone maybe nowadays
they think a little bit more about free
testosterone and maybe they think about
estrogen is also being important not to
crush estrogen but DHT is you know at
least to my mind the linchpin of so many
of the things that subjectively people
are really focused on libido motivation
Drive Etc
I have one final question it's just a
brief one but many of us have heard that
the bpas
um that are present in you know plastic
bottles and even in certain aluminum
cans and phthalates a difficult word to
pronounce but a fun one nonetheless
phthalates
um and work by Dr Shana Swann has shown
that phthalate exposure to the fetus to
pregnant mothers into fetuses very
likely is negatively impacting sperm
counts testosterone levels and even
changing um genitalia size for the worse
um in males nowadays
um I saw a beautiful lecture that Dr
Shayna Swan did on this when I was in
Copenhagen and it's very clear that it's
negatively impacting the male fetus she
was also on Joe Rogan's podcast I hope
to get her on this podcast however what
she couldn't answer for me was whether
or not phthalates and bpas and these
things present in Plastics and some
people wouldn't claim in tap water are
bad for males after they're born and
after puberty what are your thoughts on
or I should just ask you do you drink
water out of plastic bottles do you
avoid drinking out of cans that are not
specifically non-bpa containing cans and
do you actively avoid phthalates my
understanding is that phthalates are
most enriched in pesticides and that's
why you're seeing dramatic drops in
sperm and testosterone levels mainly in
rural areas where they're dust cropping
yeah so I do avoid drinking out of cans
that are Plastics that may have uh BPA
or bisphenol a in them bisphenol a is
known to bind to what I would consider
the fifth estrogen receptor estrogen
related receptor gamma
so it it I would I would consider it a
xenoestrogen so phytoestrogens are
estrogens from plants and in general
they're not concerning or clinically
significant and xenoestrogens are just
other estrogens
so I do avoid BPA and I also test my
water I use a water testing service and
I test it both after it's through my
water filter and the tap water that my
two boys drink almost every day and it
was very interesting I only found one
microplastic just a bit over the
reference range so it wasn't a terrible
top score but even in developed
countries these are widely variable
as far as pathalates again very
difficult and interesting to pronounce
but I remember learning about these
because there was I believe a lawsuit
that had to do with mac and cheese
and this is probably five years ago and
I was coming up with my list of uh each
provider that does obstetrics has a list
what to avoid for the pregnant lady you
know a sketchy deli meats or a high
Mercury fish like swordfish and salmon
and I actually added processed mac and
cheese to that list
well thank you for that I'm going to
extract your statement that you avoid
drinking out of plastic bottles when
when possible I'm guessing you're not
neurotically attached to that if you're
dying of thirst you might you know crack
a plastic bottle of water to survive but
listen
um Kyle
Dr Gillette thank you so much you gave
us an enormous wealth of knowledge
everything from behaviors to psychology
to supplementation to prescription drugs
we will make sure to point out where
people can get a hold of you on
Instagram and on Twitter and
um and on other websites in our show
note captions but really just on behalf
of the audience and just for myself
thank you so much you have an immense
amount of knowledge and you're
exquisitely good at sharing it with
people in an actionable way so thank you
my pleasure
thank you for joining me today for my
discussion with Dr Kyle Gillette all
about male hormone optimization I just
want to remind everybody that we will
soon have an episode all about female
hormone optimization if you're learning
from and are enjoying this podcast
please subscribe to our YouTube channel
that's a terrific zero cost way to
support us in addition please subscribe
to the podcast on both Spotify and apple
and on both Spotify and apple you can
leave us up to a five-star review if you
have questions for us or comments about
the podcast or guests that you'd like me
to interview on The huberman Lab podcast
please put those in the comments section
on YouTube we do read all the comments
in addition please check out the
sponsors mentioned at the beginning and
throughout today's episode that's the
best way to support this podcast if
you're not already following huberman
lab on social media we are huberman lab
on all platforms so that's Instagram
Twitter LinkedIn and Facebook and all of
those places I describe science and
science related tools some of which
overlap with the contents of the
huberman Lab podcast but much of which
is distinct from content on the huberman
Lab podcast so again it's huberman lab
on all social media platforms during
today's episode and on many previous
episodes of The huberman Lab podcast we
discuss supplements while supplements
aren't necessary for everybody many
people derive tremendous benefit from
them for things like sleep hormone
augmentation and focus if you'd like to
see the supplements discussed on various
episodes of The huberman Lab podcast
please go to live momentous.com huberman
we partner with momentous because they
are extremely high quality they ship
internationally and they formulated
supplements in the precise ways that are
discussed as optimal to take for various
outcomes here on the huberman Lab
podcast if you haven't already
subscribed to the huberman Lab podcast
newsletter it is a monthly newsletter
that includes summaries of podcast
episodes as well as tool kits all of
which are completely zero cost all you
have to do is provide your email to sign
up we do not share your email with
anybody you do this by going to
hubermanlab.com go to the menu and tap
down to newsletter provide your email
you'll go to confirmation link click on
that link and you'll receive our monthly
newsletters and you can also access any
of the previous newsletters that we've
released including the toolkit for sleep
for Fitness deliberate cold exposure and
so on by going to hubermanlab.com going
to the menu going to newsletter and
there you'll see those as immediately
downloadable PDFs thank you once again
for joining me for today's discussion
about male hormone optimization with Dr
Kyle Gillette and as always thank you
for your interest in science
[Music]
